The SaaS SEO MBA is a collection of the internet's best resources on SEO for SaaS companies.
Covering a broad range of advanced-level concepts and frameworks, these resources are meant to be a comprehensive curriculum on everything you need to know about SEO for SaaS companies.
All told, these resources cover about a decade’s worth of SEO knowledge in a day of reading. You’ll find topics like technical SEO, strategy, keyword selection, content planning, link building, and more.
It's a modern MBA for SaaS marketers.
Website Setup & Architecture
The foundation of all SEO is a combination of technical factors and site architecture. Ensuring that your website is properly set up to be indexed and that you have the right content to maximize your potential search visibility is key.
These resources provide a deep dive into each of these considerations.


Technical SEO For SaaS
________________


Definition
At the highest level, technical SEO is the act of setting up your site so that it is accessible to search engines, tells them clearly what your site and pages are about, loads quickly for users and search engines, and provides a great experience through all of that.
What Platform To Build Your Marketing Site On
There is first basic technical SEO, which involves building your site on a platform that the search engines can crawl and index. Some platforms, like WordPress, may not be sexy but they are proven and have many resources available to help you optimize it. Out of the box, the platform is pretty SEO-friendly. Similar platforms that have long been used and are relatively SEO-friendly out of the box are SquareSpace and Joomla, though each has their own challenges to SEO as well.
Other technologies you might use and platforms that you might run your SaaS marketing site on are less SEO friendly. Technologies like React and Vue, both very popular JavaScript frameworks, can be SEO friendly (as can Angular), but you have to know to server-side render any content you want indexed and then constantly keep up with changes to search engine crawling abilities.
Google is pretty good at JavaScript these days, though server-side rendering for React/Vue and using something like Brombone for Angular is still necessary. Bing, on the other hand, can’t really crawl JavaScript.
So what would we recommend for a marketing site that is SEO friendly?
First, WordPress. It’s trusted, it’s simple, it’s easy to configure. There are security concerns but those are also quite easily dealt with. The great thing about WordPress is that most front end and full stack developers have experience on it and can learn WordPress’s slightly unique version of PHP. You can also fairly easily find good WordPress developers should you be in a pinch. We recommend hosting on Kinsta (our current host) or WPengine (our previous host) as they are dedicated to WordPress hosting.
Second, Craft. Craft is a relative newcomer to the CMS space, but increasingly more SaaS sites are using it for their marketing site for its ease of use. You have to pay for a license (around $299 per year) and self-host though they do have a few recommended hosts.
Third, SquareSpace. SquareSpace is not as extendable as WordPress, as it is not self-hosted. But it is simple and easy to use and has most SEO considerations baked into it. It’s less extendable, but if you’re just trying to get a site up and you don’t have WordPress experience then this might be a good first choice.
Fourth, build your own using a trusted technology like PHP. As I’ve already said, you can use whatever technology you want but each has its own challenges. I rarely recommend doing this as the other three mentioned above work so well and require vastly less upkeep.
A Note On Logged-In Web Apps
One area that I constantly have to clarify with SaaS teams is this – search engines do not crawl your logged in application. If you put content behind a log in or paywall, then you do not have to worry about them crawling those URLs.
Conversely, if you want content to be crawled then do not put it behind a login wall! Sure there are ways to show that you have logged in content that can still be accessed sometimes by logged out users (think about news publications with paywalls), but 99.9% of SaaS apps do not have to think about this.
If you are concerned about your web app being crawled, then there are ways to ensure that it is not crawled such as:
1. Put it on a subdomain and block that subdomain in robots.txt;
2. Put any logged in pages in a subfolder that you can then block in robots. txt (eg site.com/app/ and then Disallow: /app/)
I see many SaaS companies use something like WordPress for their “marketing site”, and then a custom web app on a subdomain. This is a great way to handle your dual needs and not harm your SEO.
Important Technical SEO Elements For SaaS
Let’s talk for a while about technical and on-page SEO. We’ll also talk about some tools that you can use for diagnosing onsite errors and issues where you can improve your site to get more traffic. This section should also be taken in concert with the following chapter on keyword research, because all the technical SEO in the world without great keyword research is meaningless.
I am covering technical SEO before keyword research because most SaaS companies are very technically driven. I want to lay the groundwork of how to think about SEO and what matters before we get into driving SEO growth with keyword research, content, and link building.
Meta Elements
For every page on your site, there are meta elements in your documents’s <head> that should be present to help the search engines understand what your page is about. Note that these are separate from the on-page SEO elements mentioned above, such as H1s/H2s.
The meta elements you need to have on each page on your site are:
1. <title> – this is the text that shows in the search engines results pages (SERPs)
2. <meta name=”description”> – the text that shows below the <title> in the SERPs
3. <link rel=”canonical”> – to tell the search engines the original source of the content
4. rel next/prev – if you have pagination, this helps the search engines determine the first page to rank (also allows you to have SEO-friendly infinite scroll)
5. <meta name=”robots”> to control indexation (default is index,follow)
6. Open graph (Twitter/Facebook) tags.
To properly optimize your pages for SEO, these are the basics that you must have along with proper HTML formatting of H1s/H2s/etc described above.
Title Tag Best Practices
Your title tag is useful for two things for SEO. First, it is one of the strongest signals to the search engines what your page is about. Second, if you write good titles then you can (in partnership with the meta description) entice clicks to your site even if you are not ranked in the first position.
To be optimally optimized for SEO, your title tags must be:
* Under 600 pixels wide (used to be characters, but a multi-device world changed this);
* Descriptive of your page, otherwise the search engines may rewrite it;
* Have your target keywords near the front of the title tag (less important than it used to be, but still correlates well).
Here is an example for [proposal template]:
  

Which one would you click? It depends on if you are searching for proposal template ideas, a ready-to-use template, and which software you are using to create them. Reality is that a lot of businesses still use Word for creating their templates, but there is an opportunity here for Proposable to make a better title tag that will entice more clicks and help them move people away from Microsoft Word.
Meta Description Best Practices
The meta description is the that appears below the blue link in the SERPs. Historically the meta description would be truncated around 160 characters, though in late 2017 Google announced that they were expanding this across their search results to around 300 characters.
The meta description is not used in rankings, but it does play a key role in enticing clicks through to your website. It is important to understand if the query for which the page is ranking is transactional or informational, and that informs your meta description strategy.
Using the [proposal templates] example from above, you can see that the search engines bold the searched term when it appears in the meta description. Historically, this has correlated to increased click throughs, though these days when rich features like review stars are present this helps less. It is still worthwhile to consider if your meta description is accurately describing what is on your page, especially for transactional queries:
  

Canonical Best Practices
The canonical tag is a meta tag provided by the search engines to help website owners control potential duplicate content on their website. The canonical tag is a suggestion to the search engines that tells them the original source of the content.
In almost every case, a canonical tag is self-referential to the page. So getcredo.com/blog/ canonicals to itself with this:
<link rel=”canonical” href=”https://www.getcredo.com/blog/”>
Canonicals can also be used cross-domain. When you publish content on your website and then on another, such as Medium, then to avoid duplicate content issues (where the non-original source may outrank the original) a rel-canonical tag should be used. Medium does this by default, though many other publishers do not.
Many marketing site platforms do canonicals by default, such as WordPress using Yoast SEO.
If you’re just starting off, don’t worry about advanced canonicals. What you need to do is make sure that you have a consistent URL schema set and that your canonical points to that page from other URLs that serve the same content.
For example, maybe you use a technology that makes it impossible to redirect all UPPERCASE and Sentence-Case URLs to the main /this-is-our-url URL. While ideally you would redirect all other permutations (www/non-www, trailing slash/non-trailing slash, UPPERCASE/Sentence-Case) into your one canonical URL of /this-is-our-url, if your technology does not allow it right now then you need to implement the canonicals.
Best practice is also to self-canonical URLs to themselves with the absolute path. Your URL /this-is-our-url would then have this (assuming you use HTTPS, www, and a trailing slash):
<link rel=”canonical” href=”https://www.site.com/this-is-our-url”>
Meta Robots Best Practices
The meta robots tag is used to control indexation on an individual page level. It looks like this:
<meta name=”robots” content=”index, follow”>
The default is “index, follow”, meaning the search engines should a) index the page and b) follow the links from the page to other pages on the site, passing them link equity to help them rank.
If you do not want a page to be indexed, then you can set the meta robots tag to the following:
<meta name=”robots” content=”noindex, follow”>
This means that the page may still be crawled by the search engines, but it will not be included in their index nor findable in the search results. This is by design. If you want the page to be indexed, then set meta robots to index.
The types of pages you may not want indexed are:
* Landing pages for paid acquisition campaigns;
* URLs that are meant for logged in users only (may be better handled via robots.txt);
* Internal search pages (may be better handled via robots.txt);
* Thank you pages for email signups or checkout confirmations.
Controlling Indexation
One of the most important parts of technical SEO is controlling indexation of your pages so that the search engines are able to rank the right page for the right search query. This coupled with keyword research and proactively developing content to attract top, middle, and bottom of funnel users is singlehandedly the best thing you can do for SEO once you have your page templates properly formatted, URLs settled, and canonicals implemented correctly.
Robots.Txt
If you’re a web developer, then you should know about the robots.txt file. This file is used to control indexation on a broader level than meta robots. When a page or subfolder is blocked in robots.txt, that page is no longer crawled by the search engines. When a subfolder is blocked, then no page within that subfolder is crawled by the search engines unless a specific page is specified to be allowed.
The robots.txt is a sledgehammer to control indexation. For SaaS apps, it should most commonly be used for your logged-in application in case someone should link to a logged in page externally. You do not want the search engines to be wasting their crawl time on your pages that are only available logged in. If your app uses subdomains for users to display content publicly (such as https://site.yourservice.com), then you should not block those subdomains in robots.txt!
This file is included in the root of your site and can be found here:
https://www.domain.com/robots.txt
It has two main purposes:
1. Disallow content that you do not want crawled or indexed (there is also an Allow directive that we will explain);
2. Link to your XML sitemap (which is also submitted to the search engines), as search engine crawlers review your robots.txt file frequently to
The robots.txt file by default looks something like this (this from a WordPress installation):
User-agent: *
Disallow: /wp-admin/
Allow: /wp-admin/admin-ajax.php
Sitemap: https://www.domain.com/sitemap_index.xml
If you already have pages in the search engine index that you do not want indexed or crawled, then the fix is not as simple as blocking the page in robots.txt. This will stop the search engines from crawling the page, but will not remove the page from the index. To remove a section of your site from the search engines and stop them from crawling, first implement a meta robots noindex and then block in robots.txt once the pages have dropped from the index.
Parameter Handling
Most sites use parameters to handle filtering or sometimes to build your URLs. While I do not ever recommend using parameters for your indexable URLs that you would like to rank (instead of using site.com/type?param=keyword, use clean URLs like site.com/folder/slug-url), filtering is often completely unavoidable on your website.
Therefore, you need to control how the search engines access these pages so that you are not inadvertently serving multiple (sometimes many as 4-6) exact or near-exact duplicates of the same content. When this happens, the search engines often do not understand which version to rank, and thus you risk them ranking the wrong URL worse than they’d rank the correct URL should you send the right signals.
You can control parameters two ways (and I recommend using both)
* Via Google Search Console and Bing Webmaster Tools;
* Via canonical tags.
Like anything in SEO, the “right” answer to solving specific problems is “it depends”. Depending on the parameter, you will deal with it in different ways.
Here is how to think about when to use which solution.
Controlling parameters via Search Console/Webmaster Tools is a no-brainer that should always be taken advantage of. Each search engine will tell you the parameters they have discovered, which you can then directly tell them what to do with that specific parameter.
  

For each parameter discovered, you can specify if the parameter:
1. Tracks usage (eg a UTM tracking parameter);
2. Changes the content on the page (sorts, narrows, etc)
If the parameter tracks usage, then the search engines will pick one representative URL which should be your URL that is most often linked on your site. If you find that they are indexing the wrong URL then you can also apply a canonical tag to direct them to the URL you would like them to rank, though you should also change your internal linking to link to that URL and not a parameter version.
If the parameter changes page content, then you should choose what the parameter does (Sorts, Narrows, Specifies, Translates, Paginates, Other) and then what the search engines should do. I normally leave the directive as “Let Googlebot decide”, but if it a logged in URL for example and they are discovering/crawling it then I will tell them to crawl No URLs.
Use canonical tags with parameters when you have filtering options on the front end of the site that you do not want indexed. For example, site.com/slug-url?sort=ascending&date=today would canonical back to site.com/slug-url because your two parameters are not new content that you want the search engines to index. These URLs are not showing new content, but rather sorting and specifying a specific date. If you want the specific date indexed, then the correct solution is to create a specific URL path (eg site.com/slug-url/date) instead of using a parameter.
Redirects
There are two main types of redirects that are used in SEO, and knowing the difference is important to your SEO success.
The two are:
* 301 – a permanent redirect from one URL to another URL
* 302 – a temporary redirect from one URL to another URL.
There is always debate within the SEO world about redirects. It is one of those arguments that never dies, similar to “which technology should I use for my web app” conversations within the SaaS world.
While people will debate it, the answer to “Which redirect should I use and when?” is answered in the definitions of the two redirects.
If your URL is moving permanently, then you should use a 301 redirect. This has been proven time and time again to pass link equity to the new URL so that any links pointing to the old URL now count towards the new URL ranking. A 301 redirect will also remove the old URL from the index and the new URL will begin ranking.
If your URL is moving temporarily (such as for maintenance) and you expect it to come back in short order, then use a 302 redirect. An example of when to use a 302 redirect on a SaaS marketing site would be if you were removing a feature, and thus its dedicated landing page, for a while but plan to bring it back. You could 302 redirect the feature URL to your /features (or equivalent) page and remove the individual feature page from XML sitemaps and internal linking. The URL will not drop from the search index, but it also will not rank as well as before. When you bring back the page, undo the 302 redirect.
Takeaway: do not debate if a 301 or 302 redirect will pass link equity or not. While your tech stack may default to one, it is always possible to fix it to be able to apply the correct redirect. If you are current redirecting via 302 instead of 301 for permanent redirects, get an understanding of the links pointing to those pages to understand how many links (and thus potential rankings) you are leaving on the table.
XML Sitemaps
XML sitemaps are your direct way to tell the search engines about your pages and gain an understanding of how well the search engines are indexing the content on your site. In Google Search Console this is found under Crawl > Sitemaps, and in Bing Webmaster Tools it is found under Dashboard > Configure my site > Sitemaps.
  

The XML sitemap structure can be found on Sitemaps.org. You should take the time to review that site because there are different XML sitemap options depending on the types of content you have on your site, such as video.
The default/base XML sitemap structure is this:
<?xml version=”1.0″ encoding=”UTF-8″?>
<urlset xmlns=”http://www.sitemaps.org/schemas/sitemap/0.9″>
<url>
<loc>http://www.example.com/</loc>
<lastmod>2005-01-01</lastmod>
<changefreq>monthly</changefreq>
<priority>0.8</priority>
</url>
</urlset>
Your XML sitemaps should be dynamically generated, meaning that every time a new page/post is published or removed from your site, the sitemap should update as well. Sitemaps should only serve URL that return a 200 status code and are the canonical URL. If a URL redirects, is blocked in robots.txt, or canonicals to another page then it should not be included. Too many non-200 URLs can cause the search engines to not trust your sitemaps, which results in worse indexation.
Most SaaS companies can get away with basic XML sitemaps because you realistically have 50-100 URLs available logged out. We do recommend dividing up your sitemaps by type of page so that you can view indexation for these buckets, such as features pages or blog posts. This can help you diagnose issues with ranking and driving traffic.
You can find a deeper dive into XML sitemaps on Credo here.
Tools
If you are looking to get basic SEO tracking in place for technical SEO purposes, we advice you to get a subscription to a few SEO tools that can monitor your SEO basics and alert you when you have issues.
* SEMrush or Moz (view our comparison here)
* Sanity Check (pull in Search Console data and receive reports)
* Screaming Frog (CPU-based site crawler, $149 for annual license)
* Google Search Console (free data from Google)
* Google Analytics
These are the basic tools to have in your toolbelt to help you with identifying major SEO issues and measuring traffic/conversions/health of your marketing.




The process of designing a SaaS website usually goes a little like this:
1. Collect random inspiration from other SaaS websites for a mood board
2. Ask product, engineering, customer service, and sales teams what they need
3. Design the website by committee
This lack of cohesion causes the website to become a jumbled mess — visually identical to thousands of other SaaS sites (pastel colors, vectors, etc.) who have also googled ‘SaaS website design tips’, but without a customer journey strategy, content strategy, or an appreciation for the needs of people at different stages of the funnel.
The website won’t perform as expected, and the company will pump more cash into driving paid traffic for demo signups and free trials. After a couple of years of below-par results, it’ll be time for a redesign.
Since working with dozens of SaaS businesses, we’ve noticed some common mistakes in the way they design their websites. Specifically, we find that a SaaS product website often has significant problems with the site architecture.
In response, we’ve created the Authority Architecture — a practical site map for high converting SaaS websites based on B2B SaaS website best practices that we’ve seen to be effective on dozens of our client’s website.
This visual framework is designed to show SaaS companies how to structure their site, but also helps marketers see where content and resources should be strategically placed.
 B2B SaaS Authority Architecture Website Map View Our B2B SaaS Authority Architecture Website Map by clicking here.
At Powered By Search, we think in terms of attention, connection, and conversion. In this article, we’ll go through each section of this Authority SaaS Website Design Map, with screenshots, and focus on how to build a connection by using SaaS website best practices to speak to prospects in a way that will make a lasting first impression.
We help B2B SaaS companies grow MRR through SEO and Paid Media services. If you’d like to learn more about our agency’s approach, here are some resources for you to check out:
* Article: Why we’re considered to be a leading SaaS Marketing Agency
* Case Study: How Structure Studios Grew Their Revenue from $8 Million to More Than $12 Million in 2 Years By Learning How to Communicate with Their Ideal Customers
* Agency Methodology: The Predictable Growth Methodology
If you prefer to listen to this article, you can check it out on our podcast, SaaS Marketing Bites or listen here:
Homepage
 Homepage: Product Hook Headline - Product Hero Shot or Video - Lead Magnet CTA - Demo CTA - Customer Logos - 3 Testimonials - 3 Value Props - 3 Pillar Blog Posts - Footer We all know the basics of a SaaS homepage: a compelling headline, an eye-catching product hero shot (or explainer video clip), an obvious demo or free trial Call-to-Action (CTA), along with a clean user interface — focusing on providing a simple user experience. And most SaaS companies also know about the impact of social proof elements — such as testimonials and customer logos.
These are standard best practices and key design elements that build trust and convert visitors.
However, we do see some common mistakes in SaaS website homepage design.
Lead Magnet CTA
For many SaaS companies, creating a homepage lead magnet CTA is an afterthought. They miss the opportunity to educate people or provide added value to prospects who are in the middle of the funnel.
If your SaaS product is relatively low Annual Contract Value (ACV) — say, circa $1200 — you should showcase a free usable template or toolkit in your lead magnet Call-to-Action (CTA). This is a functional and valuable offer. It’s not quite the software, but it gives a preview for the real benefits the person will experience once they’ve signed up to a free trial or demo.
For higher ACV SaaS products — say, $50,000 or more — the buying decision is more complex. In this context, the lead magnet CTA should provide detailed pre-purchase education. This could be a “State of the Industry” report, a playbook for integrations, or a comparison between enterprise-level solutions.
 Contentful Homepage Value Props: Pros Without Cons
We got this idea from Conversion Rate Experts, who talk about writing value propositions to talk about a benefit and the pain point the benefit alleviates — but worded in a way in which both are positive.
So, for example, a chatbot or support automation software might say something like:
“Resolve complaints in minutes, without having to hire a customer service team.”
The “resolve complaints in minutes” is the benefit, and the “without having to hire a customer service team” is the pain point that it resolves. This is a concise alternative to focusing on the pain point negatively, for example “it’s an expensive hassle to hire and train a customer service team, but…”.
Product marketers for SaaS often want to bury the bad stuff, because it can shine a light on whether the solution actually prevents that particular pain point in such solid terms. But by doing this, you miss an opportunity to tap into real experiences — essential for creating better connection with website visitors.
Pillar Blog Posts
A lot of SaaS companies make the mistake of simply feeding their most recent blog posts into the homepage. Next, if you’re going to show blog posts, we believe it’s better to dig into analytics to find the blog articles that give the best return in terms of engagement, signups, or lead magnet downloads and show those on the homepage, instead.
Alternatively, you can feed in your best three blog posts that target each stage of the funnel — top, middle, and bottom. Each one of these will provide a unique journey for the prospect. For example, a top-of-funnel blog post could feature a story of a customer solving problems that you know many of your customers have — which can help prospects that need to become problem-aware. A bottom-of-funnel blog post could be one that discusses your pricing, or compares your product to a competitor.
How It Works
 How It Works: Feature & Benefit pages and the Use Case pages If a prospect visits the How it Works page, they’re interested in the logistics of the solution. But too many SaaS companies talk about these details on a vague high level, and they hide the most compelling details of how their software works for the demo. This is usually because they don’t want competitors to understand the innermost workings of the product.
But by putting this information behind the demo signup gate — plus requiring the prospect to turn up and watch it — they don’t give people what they need to make an informed decision. We believe the most important elements of How it Works are the Feature & Benefit pages and the Use Case pages.
So, let’s dig into how the best SaaS companies can get these elements right.
Feature & Benefit Pages
Let’s assume we’re talking about a web-based accounting software. In this case, the Feature & Benefit pages should be structured as follows:
1. Feature: “Send invoices effortlessly!”
2. Pain Point Question: “Are you wasting time by sending invoices manually?”
3. Benefit: “Get paid faster, without having to chase clients every week.”
4. Proof: A customer story and a testimonial. For example, a freelancer who was creating invoices manually, and emailing them without response. They’d need to chase them up — which would distract them from the work they actually loved.
Related:  SaaS Website Redesign: How We Used the Authority Architecture Framework to Rebuild This POS Software Company’s Website
Here’s why we recommend this structure:
Firstly, point #1 (Feature) and #2 (Pain Point Question) pair the feature with the pain point it solves. This lets you talk about a feature in the context of it’s benefit and will resonate with the prospect who has a pain point.
Point #3 (Benefit) hits the “pro without con” line, doubling down on the pain point. Finally, #4 gives credibility and backup to show how the product has been practically applied, with great results.
Note: A lot of SaaS clients come to us and say they don’t have a customer testimonial like this. If that’s the case for you, write one and find an existing customer that matches. Actually go to them and ask if they’re willing to write a similar testimonial or stand behind this one, tweaking it to however it applies to them. Don’t wait for it — look at your customers and find a quote that matches the story you want to tell. Honesty in the testimonial is paramount.
Use Cases
Let’s say you have a membership management software (like my friends at Wild Apricot). Users are typically teachers, local associations, little leagues, and community groups. They often start in Excel, but as their membership database grows, the document keeps crashing. This is a real and acute pain point.
In this scenario, one Use Case would tell the story of how Wild Apricot has eased the pain for real customers by giving them a reliable, smooth, and fast way to manage members. It would talk about how Excel would crash at inopportune times, and show how this messed up operations. SaaS to the rescue!
Use Case pages expand on the information in Feature & Benefit pages — which usually don’t have space for such a detailed story because they’re just boxes: image, headlines, and paragraphs.
At the same time, Use Case pages also tap into the Who It’s For section of the website — which is something we discuss in the next part of this article.
 Ways to Use Loom: Engineering, Sales, Design Loom’s Use Case Pages
Who It’s For (i.e. Not Just Solutions or Verticals Pages)
 Who It's For: 3 avatars of common users We firmly believe that SaaS companies should be explicit about who their software is actually for on their marketing webpage. By this, we mean the specific roles, job titles or personas (as specific as possible) — not just general verticals or solutions pages (for example, “Solutions > Healthcare, Legal”, etc.).
 More Use Cases: 3 options While vertical or solutions pages are fine, in our opinion they aren’t adequate because any single SaaS product is truly different things to different people. Everybody has their own job to care about, and implementing new technology will impact different team members in nuanced ways.
And just because we “work in healthcare” doesn’t mean that we’ll be interested in Feature A, or Benefit B.
While listing job titles is a good start, you can take this to a new level by thinking about follow Clayton Christensen’s “jobs to be done” concept. This will help you position the features, benefits, and real testimonials or use cases within each avatar to match the unique viewpoint of that particular prospect.
Let’s say we’re talking about a customer service software. If we use the structure in our Authority Architecture, the Manager will want to see its reporting capabilities. How does the product track tickets, and how does it report outcomes to management? However, the Daily User (a customer service agent, perhaps) only wants it to be easy and frictionless. The Check Signer might be the CFO, and they will want to know that the new software will generate a return on investment within a reasonable timeframe.
Within these avatars, you should emphasize certain aspects of the SaaS product to match what each person cares about when they make a purchase decision.
How Is Who It’s For Different from Features and Use Cases?
These pages are different because they are explicitly geared towards a particular individual persona. There’s no subtlety — just obvious examples of how the software positively impacts their job.
This is the key thing to remember: we often use the same stories, features, and use cases as on other pages, but the information is angled more precisely to an individual. In my opinion, most SaaS websites are too paranoid about repeating the same content in various areas. On the contrary, we believe that you should double-down on the most compelling stories, and apply them in ways that make sense for each area of the site. If you look at what we include in the Feature & Benefit pages, the Use Cases, and the Who It’s For section of a website, you’ll see a lot of overlap. This is purposeful.
It’s not about only using one message once. Instead, you should be shaping your value proposition in different ways, with a different emphasis for different pages. It’s website personalization without the tech.
 FreshBooks Homepage: Who It's For Source: FreshBooks
The Remarketing Benefits of Who It’s For
The Who It’s For section can also power your remarketing engine, because you can use a Facebook Pixel to target specific audiences after they’ve been on the site.
When they hit one of the avatar pages — and/or spend a certain amount of time on a page, you can retarget them with relevant pain point focused content in their feed.
This can also be applied to the Use Cases — where you can glean that a user is particularly interested in a certain application of the SaaS product to solve a certain problem.
Pricing Page
 Pricing Page: 3 Tier Column - Enterprise (Demo) - Competitor Pricing Comparison All SaaS websites should feature information about pricing, whether it is explicit in dollars or not. For higher level enterprise SaaS products, it’s often not even possible to give numbers due to the complexity of custom integrations. But that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t have a pricing page.
The workaround might be something to pre-qualify prospects, like:
“We don’t have standardized pricing options, but we might be a good fit for you if you have a growth team of more than ten people and you’ve already invested in [Expensive Solution X] or [Expensive Solution Y].”
This sends an implicit message that your SaaS product is geared towards bigger teams and hefty budgets.
Related:  How to Design B2B SaaS Blogs for Conversion
But for most lower-ACV SaaS companies, I’d recommend the standard 3-tier pricing structure. And without exception, in our opinion every SaaS pricing table should include a non-priced “Enterprise” (or similar) field. This can simply lead to a contact form to get in touch with your sales team.
Someone who fills this out is signaling that they want to “fly business class” — and that they couldn’t possibly take their boss an invoice for $99. By not having this option, you might be missing out on revenue, or you might even dissuade the highest-tier potential customers from signing up.
Finally, if possible, you should show how your pricing compares to competitors. Basecamp does this better than any other SaaS product I’ve seen:
 A sample of how Basecamp has structured their pricing in an organized, clear way. Source: Basecamp
Why Us & Origin Story
 Why Us and the Origin Story comes next. Next up in the SaaS website architecture: Why Us and Origin Story.
This is where you pitch your brand as something more than just a software product. A lot of SaaS companies get blinded by the black and white of wanting conversions, and they get obsessed with selling the product’s value proposition. They don’t invest a lot of time or energy in these “softer” parts of the website.
But a lot of buyers are looking for more. They want to understand the culture behind the organization, the commitment to social responsibility, and the bigger long-term mission. Remember: the customer is entering into a subscription model, so they’ll be interacting with your brand on an hourly, daily, or weekly basis. They need to know what you stand for — because you’re becoming a colleague.
 HubSpot's website has a meaningful mission. Source: HubSpot
Blog
 Blog: Lead Capture, Blog Posts/ Articles Many SaaS websites waste prime real estate with a vague newsletter signup form at the top of the blog feed. But typically, the conversion rate for these forms are miniscule (typically <0.5%). We’ve seen better results when a SaaS company offers a relevant downloadable lead magnet here instead — a toolkit, template, or guide (typically 1 – 5%).
As standard best practice, each individual blog post should have CTAs in the body copy, and internal linking should be boosted by automatically feeding in related content. And as a rule, you should find ways to link back to product pages and competitor comparison pages within your blog posts — this improves SEO and guides users through to features, benefits, and use cases.
More
 More (Integrations, Resources, Support, Contact Us) Here, we’ll discuss a collection of additional pages that most SaaS marketing sites have: integrations, resources, support, and contact pages.
Most SaaS companies clutter their main navigation, but we believe Resources and Support pages should be part of the second-tier structure on SaaS websites. The users who navigate here from the homepage are typically customers, not prospects, and the prospects that do go here typically aren’t ready to convert — they are usually at the top or middle of funnel and not ready to ask for a demo (or start a trial).
The exception to this might be Integrations, depending on the software’s reliance on integrations and their importance for the value proposition. For example, Everhour (see below) is a time tracking software that needs to be plugged into a project management tool — so integrations are a key selling point:
 Everhour homepage: Integrations are a key selling point for Everhour, since it needs to be plugged into a project management tool. Another key tip for the Integrations page(s) is that you should target the technology’s keywords with your content, even if your solution doesn’t yet integrate with a particular tool. If it’s on the roadmap, get it onto the site with a “coming soon” or “do you need this integration? Let us know…” message.
The danger of not doing this is that a tool like Zapier will get a handle on these keywords. You’ll miss out on traffic, and as a result you’ll lose the opportunity to easily remarket to people on your landing page.
For example:
 Zapier puts themselves on the map for multiple integrations, whether or not they exist yet. Resources
I’ve seen a lot of SaaS companies produce new resources without considering where the gaps are in their funnel. In the Resources section of the Authority SaaS Website Design Map, we have 11 different content types, split between awareness stages: Problem Unaware, Problem Aware, and Solution Aware.
The role of the resources in this section is to move people from Problem Unaware to Solution Aware.
Marketers think “if a webinar went okay last year — why not do another one?”, but this is haphazard and not strategic enough. Instead, we use a methodical approach for planning SaaS marketing resources, using a traffic light system to figure out what works and what doesn’t:
* If you’ve never done webinars, that’s a red.
* If you’ve done webinars and they went okay, that’s a yellow.
* If you’ve nailed webinars and they successfully generate leads on a consistent basis, that’s a green.
We do this for every resource, and by the end of the exercise it’s clear which areas need improvement.
Next, we work backwards through the list to improve resources from the bottom of the funnel to the top. In other words, we start with double down on greens (resources that have been proven to work) and optimize them or find ways to get more demo requests or signups from them, before moving to yellows and reds. Note that this is contrarian to most growth hacking lore, which focuses on how to get more traffic, rather than converting the traffic a company already gets.
Footer
 Footer: Cookies, 404 Error, VS competitor, Alternatives, etc. Don’t miss an opportunity with the 404 Error Page. Can you direct them to an avatar page, or can you identify their pain points and/or motivations in another way?
 Drift has a clever 404 page that redirects you to other interesting material on their site. Source: Drift
The footer is also a useful place to host content about competitors and alternatives. Whether you like it or not, your prospects will be surfing around and comparing solutions. These pages should be designed to rank organically for keyword terms — to make sure you have your say in the conversation.
 Salesforce offers reviews and comparisons about their competitors on their site; as shown in the screenshot with "Zoho". Source: Salesforce
Final Takeaways
The Authority Architecture SaaS site map isn’t just to help a SaaS company build a decent website from scratch, though it certainly helps. In fact, it’s better to see this framework as a living and breathing guide for SaaS website structure — on an ongoing basis.
What makes a great SaaS website?
Great SaaS websites have a site architecture that helps visitors become customers. They do this by having a very clear and complete site architecture that helps visitors move through the stages of awareness and addresses their objections and questions easily.
As a rule of thumb, you should try to outline conversion paths within the site to make it easy for you to identify who is using each page, and what they want. These “clean lines” of content allow for better remarketing, better multi-path customer journeys, and easier analysis of conversion flows.
SaaS Strategy & Frameworks
Next, let's do a deep dive into building a SaaS SEO strategy, how to align it with other parts of the business model, and a bit of high-level thinking about why SEO is so essential as a core business strategy.


3. Building a Full-Funnel SaaS SEO Strategy
This post is about how to build a growth-focused SaaS SEO strategy.
But first, a little story…
Six weeks ago, I was struggling.
I was trying to art direct some updates to our website. (Cue 🙄)
But, I’m not a designer.
So, I went to Google.
“How to do web design for non-designers,” I searched.
I slowly scanned the search results page. Well, not the whole page—probably just the first three or four results—until I spotted a link that looked promising.
“Web design without a web designer?” it read.
Click.
Reading through the article, I discovered that the problem I’m facing is a common one. As it turns out, many growing agencies don’t have all the specialized skills and tools they need for all their projects.
In my case, it seemed like prototyping software might be just what I was looking for. I basically wanted to visualize my design ideas and communicate them to the team.
Oh, and—imagine that—the blog I clicked on, was published by Figma. A company that just happens to sell this exact software. I clicked from the blog post to the homepage to learn more.
As I scanned the page, reading about Figma’s features and benefits, a realization slowly dawned.
I had just entered the top of their funnel.
 HubSpot's inbound marketing funnel graphic. 
Source: HubSpot
I spend a big part of my life researching and mapping out this process from the perspective of our clients and their businesses. And yet, my own buyer journey happened so naturally, stepping into it didn’t even feel like a conscious act.
I was just looking for information about a problem.
But this initial search led me to a solution—Figma. From there, I dug into the space further,
* comparing their tool to competitors, and
* learning how the software actually works (could I really use it with no design experience?)
And, ultimately, I decided to pull the trigger. I’m now a happy Figma user; our site got a small design refresh, and I’m already planning the next update.
This exact story happens millions of times a day, every single day.
And, just like in my story, the SaaS companies with strong SEO strategies appear higher up in the Google search results.
This means they get more traffic. But more importantly, they get more targeted traffic, from internet users who are in an active buying cycle—even if they don’t realize it. These qualified site visitors are much easier to convert into leads and paying customers.
The software companies I found in my search didn’t show up on Google’s first page by accident.
* They invested in a smart SEO strategy.
* They built reader-focused content that introduced me to a solution to my problem.
* They optimized their website to rank for the search terms most relevant to their product and their ideal customers.
* They earned backlinks that helped them outrank their competitors.
All of these factors helped put them front-and-center in my buying journey. And these same factors will help them remain a natural destination in the buying journey for other buyers who turn to Google every day to find information and solutions to their problems.
That’s the power of SEO for SaaS businesses.
The right SEO strategy is critical to building a successful inbound customer acquisition model that:
a) compounds over time, and
b) reliably generates high-quality traffic and leads.
What Is SaaS SEO and What Makes it Different from SEO for Other Types of Companies?
In short, SaaS SEO is a marketing strategy focused on attracting potential customers to the SaaS website and converting these visitors into users or customers. It does this by getting the site to rank in search engines (mainly Google search) for specific keywords.
With the right SEO strategy, software companies can attract a steady stream of inbound traffic and user sign-ups—powering organic growth.
Compared to other digital marketing channels like paid advertising or offline channels like outbound sales, the cost of SEO-driven content marketing can be much lower. This, plus the long-term lead generation value of SEO makes it a smart investment for B2B SaaS companies.
The backbone of SaaS SEO is the same as SEO for any other business. However, there are some aspects of optimizing a SaaS website that are quite different from SEO for other types of businesses.
This guide specifically focuses on the B2B SaaS business model.
I’d recommend a somewhat different strategy for an eCommerce business or a small business that targets local customers—and local SEO is a whole different can of worms!
The Basics of SaaS SEO and Content Marketing
Before we get too far into the weeds, let’s do a quick introduction to the relationship between SEO and content marketing. Throughout this article, I’ll refer to both—almost interchangeably.
These terms don’t really mean the same thing, but they go hand-in-hand.
 SEO is driven by investing in content marketing. 

SEO stands for “search engine optimization.” In a nutshell, this is the process of fine-tuning your site to show up higher on the search engine results page (SERP) for someone’s Google search or “search query”.
Let’s Talk About Your SaaS SEO Strategy
Book a strategy call with our team to discuss how we can help you hit your growth goals.
Work with Optimist
A successful SEO strategy involves tweaking both on-page and off-page factors to help your website rank better.
On the other hand, content marketing is like the soil that you need to grow a healthy SEO strategy. Content marketing fuels SEO by providing the targeted content, keywords, and links that you need to drive growth through search.
Now, getting more specific, SaaS SEO is a strategy for optimizing your SaaS website and creating content. The goal is to attract prospective buyers, drive traffic and conversions, and help educate and retain your current users.
Effective SaaS SEO almost always involves two tactics:
1. The on-page optimization of your marketing website—home page, feature pages, use case pages, etc., and
2. Investing in content marketing that helps improve your visibility to target customers.
So, when you invest in an SEO strategy for your SaaS company, here’s how it should work:
* Identify the pain points or “job(s) to be done” (JTBD) your product solves
* Build a top-of-the-funnel keyword strategy based on the searches (or “queries”) your target buyers use at the beginning of their purchase journey
* Research product keywords that map to your home, feature(s), solution(s), and integrations pages
* Build comparison content that helps you stand out from your competitors (both direct and indirect) based on the target buyer’s initial JTBD
* Create a content map and content plan
* Fine-tune your on-page and technical SEO
* Invest in linkbuilding to help improve your rankings versus competitors
Yes, it’s a lot of steps—because SEO is a big investment.
But is it worth it? Absolutely.
Let’s look at why I think SEO is such an important focus point for SaaS companies in particular.
Why SEO for SaaS Companies Is a Worthwhile Investment
Look, there are a lot of channels and strategies out there for driving SaaS growth.
Facebook, Reddit, podcasts, email, chatbots—they all want a piece of your marketing spend.
So what makes SEO for SaaS special?
Why should you invest in this huge initiative that won’t pay off for months (or years!) when you could sling out 20 new Facebook ads and see immediate traffic and users today?
The short answer is simple: Content marketing and SEO form the foundation for a sustainable, predictable, and scalable SaaS growth strategy.
Look at how some of the most successful SaaS companies in the world have all invested heavily in content-driven growth. ZenDesk, Salesforce, Drift, Intercom, Buffer, Asana, InVision, and of course Figma—all went all-in on content marketing and SEO.
That’s not to say that they invested only in content marketing. Most of these companies have a diversified growth strategy, but content and SEO fuels the engine that drives them forward.
Let me expand on this a bit further by diving into three key reasons why SEO for SaaS is a vital investment for companies that want to scale quickly.
Reason #1: SEO Scales Exponentially
In a world full of marketing channels and acquisition strategies, inbound marketing and SEO for SaaS are among the most scalable and predictable approaches to growth.
The reason for this is simple.
Much like interest on a financial investment, the results that you generate from SEO will compound over time. With a well-executed SEO strategy, you’ll see exponential growth in targeted traffic, which can then be turned into leads and users.
 Organic traffic growth for a SaaS startup, using content marketing and SEO. 
Optimist client growth data
Search traffic is generally predictable.
As a content marketing agency, we’ve seen this time and time again. When the Optimist team works with SaaS clients, we’re able to build compounding, exponential growth.
Our strategy is to create valuable content, focus on a core set of targeted keywords, earn high-authority links, and improve the search rankings of key product marketing pages.
While the exact number of people who search for a given query will vary from day to day, you can pretty accurately predict how much traffic you’ll receive if you ranked #1 for a search term like “content marketing software.”
Reason #2: SEO Reduces Your Dependence on Paid Marketing
For many SaaS companies, paid acquisition can become a deadly addiction.
Sure, paid channels can be effective. However, as a software startup enters the growth phase, it makes sense to turn away from paid acquisition to more long-term, scalable strategies.
In almost all cases, the cost to acquire a user through a paid channel will rise over time. Your costs will increase as you wear out the audiences that are most likely to convert. Plus, as new competitors enter the market, more advertisers bid for the same inventory through paid channels, further driving up costs.
And, of course, reducing your spend is not an option.
With paid acquisition, you stop growing if you stop spending.
 The CPA for content marketing diminishes over time, while the cost of paid acquisition is likely to increase.  

With content marketing and SEO for SaaS, it works exactly the other way around.
The initial investment may be slow to yield measurable results. In most cases, it will take several months to gain real traction and see a clear pattern of growth with an inbound marketing strategy. But when that growth comes, it compounds over time and steadily becomes a long-term asset.
While SEO is not maintenance-free, the cost of acquiring new users through organic traffic should decrease over time as your inbound traffic grows.
A blog post published today has a fixed cost, but it could generate traffic and leads for years to come. This effectively shrinks the customer acquisition cost (CAC) with each new signup.
As a result, SEO is a smart long-term growth strategy for companies that need to wean themselves off of paid channels being their primary source of new user sign-ups.
Reason #3: SEO Powers All Other Acquisition Strategies
Like most marketing strategies and channels, SEO can’t function in a vacuum.
Yes, investing in content, keywords, and links will lead to a large increase in targeted, organic traffic over time. But, as you know, website traffic does not equal sign-ups or revenue. Beyond SEO, you need additional marketing strategies to capture, nurture, and convert that traffic into actual users.
The upside here is that SEO can “feed the machine”, so to speak. It does this by filling up your marketing funnel with a constant stream of qualified, persona-based traffic.
This is what makes SEO for SaaS such a critical component of marketing success. The traffic you gain powers other channels and strategies like adding email subscribers and filling your retargeting funnel.
 Content marketing is the central engine that drives nearly all of the startup growth activity that matters. 

With this all in mind, let’s dive into how you can create and pull off a successful SEO strategy—one that drives the growth in traffic and leads that you hope to achieve.
How to Map Your SEO Strategy to the SaaS Marketing Funnel
Creating a successful SaaS SEO strategy doesn’t happen by collecting a random list of keywords.
It starts with the buyer’s journey.
To get in front of your potential customers at the right times, you need to understand their problems and which keywords they may type into Google to solve them.
To do that, you need to clearly define your target audience by developing buyer personas.
These personas will help you understand:
* Problems your potential buyers experience and want to solve
* Which solutions they may be familiar with already
* Which products they’re already aware of
Using this information, you can choose target keywords, structure your website, and create helpful SaaS content. The idea is to be helpful at each step your potential user takes from the start of their research process, through to the point where they decide to sign up for your SaaS product.
(Note: In this case, we are referring to the buyer’s journey only up to the point that they sign up or begin a trial.)
 The SaaS SEO funnel begins when the buyer searches out a pain point and ends when they make a purchase decision. 

While we typically think of this as a funnel or series of stages, the buyer journey is rarely linear from top to bottom.
Because of this, you can’t assume each buyer will come to your site at the top of the funnel and simply use email or nurturing to move them through each step.
You need to develop a robust keyword and SEO strategy that extends beyond the top of the funnel to include the consideration and purchase phases.
Let’s go through each stage of the funnel and how you should address it in your SEO strategy.
Top-of-the-Funnel SEO for SaaS: Attracting Prospective SaaS Buyers
Your buyer has a problem.
And so far, they’re not sure exactly how to solve it. Hell, they may not even know how to express it! But they have an itch. Some part of their personal or professional life could be easier if they could just find the right solution.
This is their pain point.
Many SaaS buyer journeys begin here. Maybe your customer is looking to improve their customer service, or they need a way to get their clients to pay invoices faster.
Where do they turn?
The same place everyone does. The same place I turned before discovering Figma.
Google.
The buyer sets out to research the pain they are feeling, to understand it, and hopefully find a solution.
“How to get my invoices paid more quickly”, they type.
As a SaaS marketer, this is an opportunity to attract a buyer at the very start of their journey.
FREE BONUS RESOURCE
The SaaS SEO MBA
A collection of the internet’s best resources on SEO for SaaS companies.
Get the collection
We respect your privacy. Unsubscribe at any time.
From an SEO standpoint, you can usually accomplish this by creating targeted content for the specific queries that your buyer is searching, such as:
* “How to increase my sales win rate”
* “Keeping track of business expenses”
* “Grow my business”
In most cases, these become blog posts that act as a simple educational tool for your audience.
These blogs explain how the user can solve their problem or meet their need. Next, they should introduce a solution to that problem.
If you’re marketing a SaaS product, the solution should (obviously!) be a piece of software (like yours!) that has a feature that meets their needs.
 Top of the funnel SEO for SaaS is focused on problem-solution keywords and content. 

At this stage in the buyer’s journey, they’re just beginning their research process.
This means that only a small percentage of visitors (usually less than 1%) will read this content and immediately convert into a customer.
But that’s okay.
The goal you set for this content should be to fill the top of the funnel. That is, create a pool of potential buyers who are entering your sales cycle. They might not convert right away, but they’re likely to make a purchase decision in the near future.
As part of your overall SEO strategy, your goals for this content are straightforward:
1. Attract targeted traffic consisting of problem-aware prospects
2. Help the reader learn about how they can solve their problem
3. Educate the reader on a specific solution or product category
4. Capture these prospects via an email newsletter, retargeting pixel, or a free product trial with the option to upgrade.
Part of your strategy here may be to send the user further into your funnel by immediately getting them to click a link to another page on your site.
That would move them to the middle of the funnel—the next step in the journey.
Middle-of-the-Funnel SEO for SaaS: Putting Yourself Into the Buyer Consideration Set
The middle of the funnel happens after a buyer becomes aware of a solution to their problem but before they’ve begun looking into specific solutions.
During this stage, the buyer is creating a consideration set.
This is a list of tools, products, or services that may help them solve their initial pain point.
Keep in mind that the solutions your prospect is considering might not always be direct competitors to your software. They could offer a completely different solution to the same problem.
In the middle of the sales funnel, your goals should be:
1. Attract solution-aware visitors
2. Introduce your SaaS product to the consideration set
3. Educate the buyer on your product’s workflow, integrations, and which features set it apart.
 Middle of the funnel SaaS SEO is focused on solution-product keywords, which are usually product or marketing pages. 

At this stage of the buyer’s journey, they’re looking for information about product categories, features, requirements, implementation, and integration capabilities.
At this stage, they’re armed with more precise language about the types of solutions that they’re looking for, based on their previous research.
So, their queries could look like this:
* “Sales enablement tool”
* “Digital signatures for Salesforce”
* “How to choose the right CRM”
Or, they’re searching for specific ways to implement the solution. This includes integrations with other tools and software. They could also be searching within a category that fits their specific persona or industry.
For example, they might search “Accounting software for freelancers” after learning that one way to get their invoices paid faster is by using accounting software that lets them accept credit card payments.
For SaaS companies, content and pages that attract middle-of-the-funnel searches generally fall into one of six main types.
1. Product category: Your most basic searches, e.g. “help desk software”
2. Product category comparison: When the buyer is comparing multiple possible solutions to their initial problem, e.g. “help desk software vs knowledge base software”
3. Solution/industry: More specific searches that identify the buyer’s persona or industry., e.g. “B2B help desk software”
4. Features: Specific features the user wants in a solution, e.g. “help desk software with chatbots”
5. Integrations: How the software plugs into other tools, e.g. “help desk software with Salesforce integration”
6. Implementations: Specific use cases, e.g. “how to route support tickets to Slack”
Once again, keep in mind that prospective buyers can come to your website at any point in their journey.
In this case, we’re examining the middle of the funnel through the lens of SEO or organic search. That means this content isn’t necessarily geared toward users who are already in your funnel (via email, retargeting, etc.). Instead, it’s meant for visitors who are landing on your site via search.
Even though the prospect has already identified a potential solution to their pain and is actively researching tools or services, they could be landing on your website for the very first time.
So, when you plan and create content that’s optimized for middle-of-the-funnel keywords, you should assume the reader has no familiarity with your company or product at all.
Also, keep in mind that the lower in the funnel—or the further into their journey—the buyer is when they land on your website, the more likely they are to convert into an actual customer.
As a result, these keywords will likely be less popular (from a search volume perspective) than top-of-the-funnel searches. They’re also likely to be more competitive from an SEO standpoint.
This leads us to the final stage: The bottom of the funnel.
Bottom-of-the-Funnel SEO for SaaS: Differentiating Your Product from Alternative Solutions
At the bottom of the funnel, the buyer is fully aware of the problem they’re facing, the solution they will use to solve it, and likely some (or even all) of the specific products that meet their needs.
In marketing speak, we call these buyers product-aware. (Note: Product-aware refers to the fact that the buyer is aware of specific products that may meet their needs. That doesn’t necessarily mean they are aware of your product in particular.)
So what’s left?
Well, most buyers will compare multiple products to see how they stack up before they decide on the best solution.
 Bottom of the funnel SaaS SEO is where the buyer is reading about and comparing specific product options.  

This means that if your SaaS is in the consideration set already, buyers will likely be searching for info on how your product compares to competitors (both direct and indirect).
If your product is not in consideration at this point, you still have a chance to enter the conversation.
Here are your goals for bottom-of-the-funnel SEO:
1. Attract product-aware traffic
2. Inject your SaaS product into the consideration set (if it isn’t already)
3. Highlight the key features that make your product a better fit than competitors’
4. Differentiate your product category (and your specific product) from alternative solutions
The keywords you focus on here will generally fall into a few high-level buckets:
* Comparisons (X vs Y)
* Alternatives/competitors (Y Alternatives)
To position you for the searches your prospects are doing at this stage in the buying process, you’ll need to do some keyword research and competitive analysis to build out a targeted SEO strategy.
But Wait, There’s More: Pre-Funnel SaaS SEO That Attracts the Right Buyer Persona
Lastly, I want to touch on the idea of pre-funnel SEO.
This is an important approach that many SaaS SEO strategies include.
Rather than focusing only on a pool of buyers looking to solve a specific problem (problem-aware), this content—and the associated keyword(s)—is used to attract persona-qualified traffic. Persona-qualified traffic might not be in the market for a specific product or service at all!
Think of it as being in a trade publication for your industry.
You’re talking to the right people, even if not everyone is interested in what you’re selling right now.
This can be especially effective for niche industries and businesses.
You can focus on pre-funnel SEO to grow your audience if
* There are only a few targeted keywords that qualify your traffic as being the right persona and problem-aware, or
* You’re focused on generating demand in an emerging category.
Combined with other nurturing tactics, pre-funnel SEO is an effective way to both drive problem awareness and generate demand.
 HubSpot invests heavily in pre-funnel content (optimized for the persona, but not the product). 

For example, HubSpot’s content marketing strategy is extremely top-heavy. They invest a lot in creating content that attracts marketers and salespeople, and not every article they publish maps directly to a pain point that HubSpot’s software addresses.
And that’s totally fine.
Pre-funnel keywords can include any that are relevant to your buyer persona, even if they’re removed from your product itself. In HubSpot’s case, it’s everything from “how to set your marketing goals” to “how to hire a Head of Marketing”.
For HubSpot, content marketing is both an acquisition strategy and part of their brand awareness and demand generation efforts. Not every article needs to lead to immediate product signups.
In advertising terms, you might think of this as serving a similar function as a brand campaign.
Your goals with pre-funnel keywords:
* Attract persona-qualified traffic, even if they don’t necessarily have an immediate need for your product
* Fill your retargeting funnel
* Achieve a micro-conversion (email signup, content download, etc.)
* Build an addressable audience within your target group(s)
How to Think About Keyword Research for SaaS SEO
Now that we’ve covered the ins and outs of SEO throughout the marketing funnel, it’s important to talk about your keyword strategy—the heart of successful SEO for SaaS companies. 
In order to rank for your target keywords, you need to first identify those keywords and then create pages or content on your site that are optimized for each query.
For the sake of this guide, I’m not going to go through the entire keyword research process from start to finish. Our friends Brian Dean at Backlinko and Tim Soulo over at Ahrefs have each written very thorough tactical guides on how to conduct keyword research from scratch.
When we conduct keyword research for SaaS products, we need to think about more than just the potential customer.
We also need to think about search intent.
Search intent is how Google’s algorithm classifies every query that a searcher types into the search engine. Search intent determines which types of pages and content will appear in the search results.
For instance, if you type “keyword research software” into Google, you’ll get pages advertising and reviewing specific software products.
 How to Think About Keyword Research for SaaS SEO 

This is what we call “commercial” intent—the searcher expects to see specific products that match the category so they can identify the right one for them.
But if you search “how to do keyword research”, you’ll get very different results.
You’ll see how-to guides and educational articles.
This means that we need to match the content or page that we are creating to the intent of the search. Otherwise, we won’t be able to rank for the query driving the search.
Whether you’re targeting short-tail keywords (head terms) or niche, long-tail keywords, you’ll want to plan and create content that matches the search intent:
* Informational/Educational: Blog posts, guides, how-tos, and case studies
* Commercial: Home page, product marketing pages, landing pages, and product lists (listicles)
* Transactional: Product pages (more common in eCommerce than SaaS)
* Navigational: The main pages of your site (home page, features, pricing, login, etc.)
Search intent can also be “mixed”, meaning Google shows results to answer multiple intents.
Remember: Don’t try to force a page to rank for a keyword if it doesn’t fit the search intent. If you try to make your home page rank for “how to do keyword research”, you’ll find it’s pretty much impossible.
Ultimately, it comes down to the user experience.
Translation: give the people what they want, as quickly and easily as possible.
You need to understand where the buyer is in their journey, what kind of search results they need (and expect), and match your content to both.
Problem-Solution Keywords (Top of the Funnel)
To build a top-of-the-funnel strategy, you should start with your buyer’s pain points or problems.
Let’s use a real-world example to walk through this together.
Drift sells some cool website chat software, along with bots and automation features.However, when a prospect begins the buying process, they don’t usually set out to buy website chat software. Instead, they have a specific problem to solve, a pain point to address, or a JTBD (remember, that’s “job(s) to be done”).
 Drift's content hones in on specific JTBD that their buyers can solve using different features in their product.  

Maybe they want to shorten their sales cycle, generate more leads from their website, or automate lead qualification.
These are all pain points or JTBD that Drift can help them solve.
The keyword research process should begin by identifying these pain points and JTBD. These will, in turn, lead them to use your product.Start at the top of the funnel by creating a problem-solution map that breaks down your product, features, and use cases into user stories (JTBD).
 Top of the funnel content mapping for Drift 

Each user story should present a specific problem or pain point experienced by the user when they first begin their buying journey. You can then use that pain point to identify specific keywords that you should target at the top of the funnel.
 Top of the funnel keyword mapping for Drift. 

Our process at Optimist involves a mix of several approaches:
* The JTBD framework
* Competitor analysis
* Feature/pain point mapping
For each of our clients, we go through a deep research process where we begin by understanding the customer’s initial problem. Next, we conduct keyword research for each use case and use this data to build an SEO strategy.
As we work through all the individual features and personas, we uncover a huge number of specific “jobs” that customers are “hiring the product” to accomplish—and how they align with the product’s features.
At this stage, most content will have informational intent, meaning the user is looking for pages to help them learn more about the topic they’re researching.
Solution-Product Keywords (Middle of the Funnel)
Continuing down the SEO funnel, we move into the middle stage of the buyer’s journey.
At this stage, the prospect is looking for specific product categories and features they’ve identified as potential solutions to their problem.
You want to approach this research by looking at several different types of keywords that could identify solution-aware buyers searching for specific products to add to their consideration set, such as:
* Product category keywords
* Product feature keywords
* Industry/vertical keywords
* Implementation/integration keywords
We go through this process in a pretty simple way.
First, we work through the product’s various features and break them down into the features or use cases that we think buyers might be searching for.
The content this drives ranges all the way from a high-level description of your software, down to its individual features and use cases. Of course, we use actual keyword data to guide the specific language choices.
 Middle-of-the-funnel keyword mapping for Drift is focused on identifying specific solutions or use cases. 

Next, we identify the key industries and verticals you serve and want to target with custom-tailored solutions pages. In Drift’s case, they emphasize key teams or roles rather than specific verticals. That’s okay, too.
 Screenshot from Drift's website shows their persona-driven navigation and landing pages. 

These become their own set of keywords (and eventually pages or content) that are optimized to attract this persona-specific or industry-specific traffic.
Lastly, we look at any key integrations that could warrant their own pages or content. We also try to identify any key implementation use cases that have significant search volume.
Keep in mind that during this research phase, we start with rough brainstorming.
Armed with a bunch of our best guesses, we then use a tool like Ahrefs to conduct dig into the data and narrow down which keywords we should target.
During this research, you should carefully consider the user intent behind the query. You can often verify intent by running the search yourself and seeing which search results Google sees as the most relevant.
Middle of the funnel keywords often have split search intent, typically between informational and commercial intent.If I’m searching for “website lead generation” I am trying to solve a problem—I need a way to generate more leads.
 Google SERP show the intent targeting given the query and where it lands in the funnel. 

The SERP reflects that intent.
The top results are articles, guides, and resources. They’re not product or feature pages.
On the other hand, if I search for “website lead generation software”, I’ve already identified the solution to my problem and I’m now looking for specific products that meet my needs.
Often, you’ll find that keywords that seem to fall into this stage of the funnel actually belong in a different part of the journey. That’s okay—the keyword may still be an important part of your overall strategy. But, in order to rank, you’ll want to be sure that the content on your page matches the intent behind the search.
Product Comparison and Purchase Keywords (Bottom of the Funnel)
Now, we’ve moved on to the final phase of our keyword research process.
We want to create comparison pages that let us capture search traffic from buyers who are evaluating specific product solutions.
We start this process by making a list of competitors.
This list should include direct competitors (like Intercom, in Drift’s case) but also indirect competitors. That is, alternative solutions to the problems we identified at the top of the funnel.
 Google search page shows results for posts comparing Drift and Intercom. 

For instance, some buyers may be comparing the idea of using live chat software versus a website form or exit-intent popup software. Both of these alternative solutions could do the “job” of generating more inbound leads.
Ultimately, the competitor set—the various possible solutions the user is evaluating—will depend heavily on the JTBD of each individual buyer.
 Bottom of the funnel content mapping for Drift, focuses on comparing their software to other direct and indirect competitors. 

The search intent here is a blend of commercial and educational.
Most of the bottom of the funnel keywords fall into a few key buckets:
* X vs Y
* X Alternatives/Competitors
* How to Choose the Right X Software (Buyer’s Guide)
Using a keyword tool like Ahrefs or SEMRush is important at this stage. This will help you uncover and compare the various relevant keyword combinations. It can also help you understand how prospects think about your competitor set, which is probably different from what you expect.
When in doubt, follow the data!
Bringing it All Together: Creating an SEO Content Map
Following this process of analysis and research, you should have a long list of keywords that fall somewhere along the buyer’s journey.
So, now what?
The Complete Content & SEO Growth Collection
Get the full list of strategies, tactics, and tools you need to plan and execute a content marketing strategy that will help you achieve explosive growth.
No tricks, gimmicks, or bullshit.
Get Essential Reading, Tools, and Know-How
Next, you synthesize the data into an actionable plan. This plan will inform everything from your site structure to landing pages, blog content, and product features, solutions, or integrations content.
Here’s what that may look like, in a nutshell:
1. Keep your keywords segmented by funnel stage
2. Within each funnel stage, sort your list of keywords into groups or individual keywords that can be reasonably targeted with a single page (1-3 very similar keywords/variations per page)
3. Create a plan that maps out all the keyword groups you are planning to target, with some basic details about what content should be included
4. If applicable, compare your content map with your existing website content and update or optimize any pages that align with the content map
5. Where there are gaps, plan to create new pages or write new content to target these keywords across the buyer’s journey
 Content funnel for chatbots software shows how all of the content comes together. 

This becomes your tactical guide.
As I mentioned before, you’ll want to create new content that’s optimized for the keyword groups that you identified here to maximize your SaaS website’s footprint in the search results.This will give you the opportunity to capture search traffic from prospects as they progress through their buying journey.
Let’s Talk About Your SaaS SEO Strategy
Book a strategy call with our team to discuss how we can help you hit your growth goals.
Work with Optimist
On-Page Optimization and Technical SEO
It takes a bit more than just keywords on a page to rank on Google’s first page.
Of course, it all starts with high-quality content creation. Every page and piece of content you publish should be optimized for both SEO and for the user.
Never sacrifice content quality for keywords.
But sadly, quality content on its own isn’t enough.There are some basic on-page and technical SEO considerations that you should be aware of. This guide won’t cover all of the nitty-gritty details, but Moz has a great guide on this topic.
  

Without basic on-page optimization, your chances of ranking are pretty slim.
The good news is that most of the ranking factors are pretty intuitive and common sense when you consider the user experience.
Just ask: What makes content helpful and easy to digest for you as a reader?
Must-Have On-Page SEO
Let’s start with the non-negotiables.
Your site needs to be able to be read and understood by both humans and robots. This means you need to follow a few well-established content best practices to even stand a chance of ranking.
Here are the things you absolutely need:
* Titles: Optimized, unique title tags for each page
* Heading: One H1 tag on every page, optimized for the target keyword
* Hierarchy: Obvious web page and content hierarchy, making use of H2, H3, etc. tags where it makes sense for the reader
* Code: Clean HTML and markup on every page, making it clear which elements on your site are most important
* Site Architecture: Intuitive site architecture that’s easy for humans to navigate and for search bots to crawl and index (e.g. don’t put a how-to guide under your “About” section)
* No hidden content, keyword stuffing, cloaking, or other black-hat tactics. Google will know, and punish you for it. Trust me.
If you follow these general best practices for on-site optimization and have a smart keyword strategy with content targeted at each stage of the funnel, you’re most of the way there.
But there are a few other things you can do to give yourself even more of an edge.
Powers Ups for Your SEO Strategy
Let’s talk about the things that you can implement to make your SEO even more effective.
* Meta descriptions: Many people would consider this essential. And it is important to write unique, detailed, and attention-grabbing meta descriptions for every page. But these days, Google rewrites these descriptions about 70% of the time, so I would consider this just a bonus.
* Internal links: These help both Google and users understand the relationship between different pages on your website. Add contextual hyperlinks from each internal page to 3-5 other relevant or related pages on your site using exact-match anchor text.
* Quality external links: Links to pages on authoritative websites help to create credibility with your reader—and signal authority to Google—by showing you’ve done your research.
* Image alt text: Adding a brief, detailed description to your images makes your content more accessible to visitors who use screen readers. It also helps your content to rank in Google’s Image Search results, which is a great way to drive traffic and earn organic backlinks.
* Site performance: Your website’s load speed and usability (especially on mobile devices) is a big ranking factor. Try make your site design simple so it loads quickly. Removing unnecessary code or scripts and using caching to speed up image and video loading also helps.
If you can check all of these boxes, your on-page SEO and technical SEO will be in pretty good shape and probably won’t hurt or hinder your rankings.
Linkbuilding for SaaS SEO
Most marketers cringe at the idea of asking people for links. There’s something about the whole process that just feels undignified. As a result, many marketers focus on creating great content (that’s a good start!) and hope and pray that people will find it and link to it.But, here’s the truth: Links make it easier for content to rank.
FREE BONUS RESOURCE
The SaaS SEO MBA
A collection of the internet’s best resources on SEO for SaaS companies.
Get the collection
We respect your privacy. Unsubscribe at any time.
No other ranking factor correlates more strongly with high search rankings than the number and quality of backlinks pointing to your site. And if your content doesn’t rank in the first place, how will your content be discovered in order to accrue links in a more natural way?
You need links—full stop.And you’ll need to use some form of active outreach to help get the ball rolling.
  

Links are the grease that keep the entire SEO engine moving. They help pass authority to pages like your product features pages that are important but difficult-to-earn-links-to.
Yes, even great content—even “epic” content—will not magically rank without some strategic effort to help it along the way. A big part of that strategy and effort is manual promotion through social media and targeted outreach. This “white-hat” linkbuilding outreach helps you earn links and raise your overall domain authority.
So how do you generate links?
The answer is simple.
1. You create kick-ass content (worthy of links)
2. You show it to the right people (via email outreach, pitching journalists, sharing with influencers, submitting it to newsletters and roundups, etc.)
Without getting into all of the nuances of exactly how you build links at scale, you should check out Alan Silvestri’s awesome post on Traffic Think Tank.
It’s a great guide that includes lots of tactical takeaways and repeatable strategies for generating inbound links that both power SEO and drive conversions. Alan also wrote an awesome piece on evaluating ROI for linkbuilding that’s worth a read as well.
One simple way to get started with linkbuilding is to publish guest posts on another website.
This strategy has both fans and detractors, but there is no doubt that it works.
The key to effective guest posting is focusing on building real relationships with other relevant sites within your industry or vertical. And make sure the content you write for these sites is valuable and informative—not just a lazy attempt to get a link back to your site.
But don’t skip this part of the strategy. It’s absolutely critical.
Refreshing and Updating Content
As I’m writing this, I am updating this guide, which I originally published about 2 years ago.
There’s an important reason for this: Content freshness is a ranking factor.
What this means is, all else being equal, Google gives preference to newer content on a topic versus older content on the same topic. (Again, this assumes all things are equal, like the quality of the content, page authority, site authority, topical authority, etc.)
And this makes total sense—if you consider the user experience.
1. The world is constantly changing. There are new discoveries, new data, and new ideas being announced every day.
2. New content is constantly being published. Your article may be outdated or your competitors may one-up your content over time.
There’s nothing worse than reading an article and realizing that it’s outdated—and may actually be totally wrong in light of new information.
So it makes sense that your content should be updated and refreshed periodically.
When allocating time and resources, I would plan to make minor updates and revisions to most pages every 3-4 months and major revisions approximately once a year.
This is why I always cringe when people refer to an “SEO campaign” as if SEO is a one-and-done process with a finite start and finish.
SEO is a long-term strategy. It takes long-term planning and dedication to build and maintain content over the life of your business.
SaaS SEO Metrics & Goals
It’s not much of a strategy if we don’t have an outcome in mind.
It’s always valuable to start by defining what success will look like and creating a process and workflow for measuring and evaluating your performance over time.
Using tools like Google Analytics, Google Data Studio, Ahrefs, SEMrush, and others, you’ll want to compile a core set of metrics that give you a snapshot of how things are going and what progress is happening (and at what rate).
SEO’s North-Star Metric (The Main Business Goal)
When it comes to SaaS SEO, we start by defining our north-star SEO goal.
This should be the true business objective we want to achieve. If we’re measuring the ROI of our SEO efforts, this is the return.
What does success mean?
Usually, this is something like:
* Increase organic traffic to the website by 300% in 2023 vs 2022
* Generate 1,000 SaaS product sign-ups from organic search in Q3
* Generate $1,000,000 in revenue from organic search over the next 2 years
This is our “SMART” goal—something big and specific that we want to achieve by investing in our SEO strategy.
And it usually gives us the primary metrics we’ll want to measure consistently over time.
But it’s also helpful to break that down further into other metrics that help us better understand the big picture and the results we are achieving.
Secondary Metrics
Secondary metrics are usually directional data points that tell us whether our strategy is generating results that will lead to our primary goal.
For instance, if your primary goal is revenue from organic search, then a great secondary metric might be organic search traffic.
Secondary metrics help you better understand which underlying metrics are impacting your primary goal. They can also help pinpoint which other factors may be influencing the entire business (e.g. organic leads were down last month—but all leads were down in general, so this could result from something like seasonality).
Leading Indicators
One more level of metrics will help us understand what sort of progress we’re seeing, even if it’s not reflected in the traffic or revenue data we really care about.
This can be super important for demonstrating value—especially in the early days.
SEO can be slow-moving and growth usually comes in leaps and bounds.
For instance, if you move from not ranking at all for a target keyword to ranking #11, you may not see a significant change in traffic or conversions. But you still want to know that you’re making progress toward your goal by tracking search engine rankings.
Other leading indicators might include:
* Total referring domains or backlinks
* Domain rating
* Number of keywords on page 1
* Total number of ranking keywords
Building a Scorecard
We recommend defining all of these metrics at each level and compiling them into a single report that you update every week, month, or year.
 building a scorecard 

For instance, you may have a scorecard that looks like this:
* Primary Goal: Conversions (sign-ups) from the blog
* Secondary Metrics:
   * Total conversions
   * Total site traffic
   * Sitewide organic traffic
   * Organic blog traffic
   * Organic blog traffic conversion rate
* Leading Indicators:
   * Top-10 keywords
   * Total referring domains
The most important part of SEO reporting is consistency.
Once you establish your metrics and where you’ll find them, you must report against the same benchmarks. This is the only way you’ll have a true picture of what is happening over time.
Integrating SEO into Your Broader SaaS Marketing Strategy
As we wrap up the process of building a successful SEO for SaaS companies, I must point out that, ultimately, SEO is just one channel and one strategy.The world’s most successful SaaS companies rely on a combination of up to 7 key channels to drive traffic and leads, according to data compiled and analyzed by Mike Sonders.
  

And those channels most often work together:
* Organic traffic to your blog fills the retargeting funnel, which is the basis for your paid campaigns
* Linkbuilding and PR efforts increase your brand recognition and drive WoM signups
* PPC campaigns drive product signups, which are nurtured by email
TL;DR: SEO is important, but it’s not the whole game.
Even so, as Mike points out in his post, SEO and organic traffic is consistently the number one driver for most successful SaaS companies.
Scaling targeted inbound traffic to your site is likely to be the engine that propels your company forward. That makes SEO the single most important strategy for attracting buyers to your site throughout the whole funnel.
Generating a constant stream of traffic from search is a major investment that can pay off—exponentially.
Get more kick-ass content from us
Subscribe to our email list and get regular updates.
No spam or BS. Just great, insightful articles.
Sign Up
Hiring In-House SEO vs SEO Agency
Finally, let’s talk about execution.
As we’ve covered in this guide: There are a lot of parts that go into a successful SaaS SEO strategy.
And you may be wondering if this is something your team is capable of executing in-house.
In some cases, it makes total sense to focus on handling SEO in-house and building a team.
Ultimately, it comes down to:
1. Your goals
2. Your timeline
3. Your budget
Let’s look at the three possible scenarios.
Hiring an SEO Agency or Freelancer for a Short-Term Engagement
In some cases, the best move is to hire an SEO agency to provide expert guidance on which changes and updates you can make to your site to improve your SEO.
Think of this as a project or consultation.
It will generally include:
* SEO audit
* On-page SEO recommendations
* Technical SEO recommendations
* Site structure or hierarchy recommendations
* Content plan or roadmap (no content creation)
* General guidance on best practices
This is best suited if you’re looking to score some quick wins but you’re not ready to invest in a long-term inbound/organic growth strategy.
As we discussed throughout this guide, building a long-term growth strategy isn’t a one-and-done project. But if you have a simple, tactical goal like optimizing your current site pages for keywords, then this kind of partner may be what you’re looking for.
In terms of budget, this kind of help might run somewhere in the range of $2,000 to $20,000 for most simple and small websites. If you have a large site (hundreds or thousands of pages), it could cost considerably more.
Beware of any SEO agency that is selling a long-term SEO package that doesn’t include content creation, linkbuilding, or some kind of true ongoing service.
4. Integrating SEO within the Product Triangle
Integrating SEO within the Product Triangle To Align Efforts & Maximize Impact
I know that many times as SEO specialists or consultants, when we’re so involved in the details of a process we have issues “to see the forest for the trees”, which is sometimes the reason why we fail to make the impact we had initially expected, or why our SEO recommendations are overlooked and not taken into consideration as we had wished within the existing workflow.
This is likely happening because SEO is not integrated/aligned within the organization product triangle. 
Are you not sure and/or don’t know what I’m talking about? In this post, I’m going to explain what’s the product triangle, why you should care about it as an SEO, even if you’re not a product manager and show how you can integrate SEO within an organization product triangle to align the efforts and achieve the sometimes elusive support and impact.
What’s a Product Triangle?
The product triangle is a concept developed and described by Daniel Schmidt in “A Visual Vocabulary for Product Building” as the “the environment in which a product builder lives”. 
 Product Management Fit  


The Permutations of Product Fit & Misfit – By Daniel Schmidt
A product is not a thing; it’s an evolving relationship between a technology, the people who use it (or might use it), and a business that funds its construction. An abstract representation of a product might look something like … a triangle-shaped graph I call “The Product Triangle.” The Product Triangle is the playing field on which product builders ultimately win or lose.
Daniel explains how a balance and alignment of the technology, users and business when building a product will allow it to correctly “fit” its context and succeed or to become a “misfit” and fail. For example, a misfitted technology being too difficult to maintain or user base when there are challenges to attract new users or engage current ones, or a business misfit when sales goals are not met.
I believe that business owners/decision makers/product managers/etc. anybody responsible to make the decisions for the development of a product end up operating in this type of triangle (or a variation of it), whether they’re aware or not, to find a balance that allows the product to “evolve” to achieve its functionality, growth and business goals.
The concept of a “product triangle” really resonated when I read about it since besides being an SEO consultant I’m also a co-founder/maker for my own project, Remoters.net for which one of my many roles is the one of what you would call being a “product manager” -that I share with my co-founder in this case- when we prioritize what we should build next, for which I always ask 3 questions:
Is this something that will help us to… 
* Solve users/customers problems? (the technology/features)
* Attract more/better users/customers? (the users)
* Earn more/better money that we need to keep the operations going and being profitable? (the business)
The more “yes” a potential development has when asking these questions, the more important will be for us to prioritize.
A more tangible and goal driven Product Triangle for decision makers
When I saw how my own product building decision making criteria/process connected to what Daniel described, I took his Product Triangle as a base to personalize it and better integrate it with the more “tangible” criteria and goals I use in my “product building” journey:
 product manager decision making seo 

1. Features/Functionality
The technology is a matter of building the product features/functionality that should solve users/customers problems, for which the usual challenge is: How can I make it more useful while being usable?
2. Growth/Marketing
The users is a matter of the product growth/marketing that should attract more/better users/customers, for which the usual challenge is: How can I scale it while keeping it relevant?
3. Business/Sales
The product business/sales that should earn money/resources to solve keep the operations going, solve users/customers problems, for which the usual challenge is: How can I make it profitable at the required speed?
Besides these 3 main criteria/aspects that we take into consideration to reach the main product goals, there’s also a “thread” that influence them all (represented above as a dotted circle) the organization vision, mission and values: A product effort that is highly useful and usable, allows to attract more users and grow, that is also able to earn good/more money is fantastic as long as it’s aligned to the organization vision, mission and values.
Should we first enable:
* A new filtering system in the jobs section that will help users to reach their desired jobs faster, improve their experience and engagement, enable new pages that will connect with the way user search and will attract more traffic to the site and where we will be able to show more ads to monetize the site further?
… or should we first prioritize:
* A similar jobs suggestion system that will help users to reach their desired jobs faster, improve their experience and engagement, as well as improve internal linking of existing pages?
Finding a balance & alignment between these is critical to move forward with a product that users find to be useful and usable, scales attracting relevant customers and achieves the needed level of profitability fast.
It’s critical to take this into consideration when we’re doing SEO…
Integrating SEO within the Product Triangle to align efforts, maximizing adoption & impact
As mentioned at the start: Many times as SEO specialists or consultants, when we’re so involved in the details of a process we have issues “to see the forest for the trees”. Especially when we’re not working in-house and have a lower view of what is going across the organization and how decisions are made inside. Which is sometimes the reason why:
* We don’t leverage and align our SEO recommendations within the existing organization efforts and assets, that causes them to be  overlooked and not taken into consideration as we had wished within the existing workflow.
* We don’t show the impact that SEO efforts can provide to those areas that are already a priority within the organization.
* We don’t prioritize our SEO recommendations well and fail to achieve the impact we had initially expected.
This can be avoided by integrating SEO within the product triangle.
Since some time ago, every time I start with a new SEO project, I do an audit, format and present the recommendations, or even communicate with the client… I think of their own product triangle and how SEO integrates in it, how it affects and is affected by what’s going on in the different vertexes:
 seo product triangle decision making recommendations 1. Growth/Marketing efforts: How SEO affects and is affected by the company’s other growth/marketing efforts? 
Is SEO leveraging, making the most & supporting the efforts of other digital marketing activities?
For example, social media or online PR activities to help amplify the content visibility that can help attract links towards them, taking into consideration the keywords that have been identified as better converting and more profitable in the PPC campaigns or the recurrent seasonal campaigns for which you should make sure that there’s an aligned strategy to leverage and optimize existing landing pages?
It’s then fundamental to have access to this information since the start, as well as on-going updates with other digital marketing areas.
2. The Features/Functionality of the site: How SEO affects and is affected by the site features/functionality?
Has the SEO process taken into consideration the site/product key features/functionality when doing the keyword and competition research and prioritizing the SEO recommendations to optimize their crawlability, indexability, content and identify link opportunities, to better connect and fulfill users search intent?
From the company USP, the product characteristics, the site functionalities highlighting them, the existing categorization system, to the navigation, the filtering options, their pre-sales and post-sales advice and support efforts, etc. How are potential customers/users looking for them? How these features/areas help to fulfill that demand? How can you optimize them to better connect with customers/users? How can you optimize these areas crawlability, indexability, content, etc. accordingly?
It’s critical to understand each site product/services/website features and functionalities, how the site is built to fulfill the customer demand, and what are the plans/roadmap to evolve it.
3. The Business/Sales model of the site: How SEO affects and is affected by business/sales?
Has the SEO process taken into consideration the site business model when establishing goals, prioritizing the recommendations and showing potential impact to earn support? Which are those high priority product/service lines? Which are expected new releases for which you should already start optimizing in advance? Which are those areas/pages rankings very well already and attracting top organic search traffic but with poorer conversions?
For example, if the site monetizes via ads and affiliates, what are the repercussions from a web speed, friendliness and outlinking perspective? How can you minimize any negative impact on one hand, and on the other, how can you help increase the traffic in those areas/pages types that are directly monetized and have more potential to grow?
It’s a must to understand what are the site business and sales goals, their business models and different ways of monetization.
Using the product triangle as a framework to identify the best ways to integrate with the organization other growth/marketing efforts, features/functionality and business/sales model and efforts will facilitate to: 
* Leverage existing efforts/activities/data to advance faster in the SEO analysis/implementation
* Prioritize SEO recommendations that have a higher impact at all levels to show results faster
* Format/word/present/communicate your SEO recommendations showing their impact/value in those areas that are already important/critical for the company and how they align and help other existing efforts, facilitating to earn support from decision makers and other areas
A win-win-win for SEOs!
Integrate SEO within the product triangle at different granularity levels
It’s important to note how this approach can be used also at any granularity level, for example, not at a site wide level, but when you’re analyzing or developing the SEO recommendations or follow-ups of a particular section or area of the site, taking into consideration:
* The particular growth/marketing efforts going on in that particular area/section.
* The specific features/functionalities that are offered in those areas.
* The role of those set of pages or areas within the customer journey, their role and impact in the site monetization and business.
 seo product triangle decision making recommendations site levels 

Although these are likely already aspects that you take in one way or another into consideration within your SEO processes, having a simple framework to follow, in this case, a product triangle, can further help you to not only avoid missing anything important out, but have a better understanding of the overall product context, how SEO fits in it, how it can be better leveraged, how you can better align your efforts to achieve the product and organization goals, and how to be more empathic and better communicate with your clients/bosses to achieve success together.


5. Building an SEO Moat
The SEO Moat: Why SEO Can Be A Competitive Advantage FREE CONTENT Article's Content What Is SERP Dominance? The Risk of Creating An SEO Moat Marketing is more like investing than art. Our industry often views itself more like a collection of indie film producers when it should be viewing itself with a lens more along the lines of an investment manager. There are many parallels to investing and marketing that are often overlooked. For example, similar to the way we view stocks, options, bonds, ETFs, every piece of content created; whether a blog post or a tweet – should be viewed as an asset. We should view them in this way because each asset should play a role in our ability to drive results. We should view them in this way because not all assets are created equal and some are low risk while others are high risk. We should view them in this way because we want our assets to work for us long term through dividends or exponential growth. This perspective should be rooted in the culture of every organization. But it’s not the only one. One of my favourite finance and investment terms is the Moat. An economic moat is a term coined by Warren Buffett and refers to a business’ ability to maintain competitive advantages over competition in order to protect its long-term profits and market share from competing firms. Similar to a medieval castle, a business’ moat acts as protection for those inside the fortress and their riches from the enemy. In marketing, we often overlook the fact that we have the ability to create and strengthen an organization’s Moat. When you look at this taxonomy chart outlining the various areas of a businesses’ MOAT there are a handful of sections that marketers can influence: A few that immediately stand out are: > Closely held trade secrets: Unlocking a growth channel others avoid > Increasing unit value: Understanding pricing strategy & value perception > Network effects: Assisting with iterations of the product to drive scale > Economies of scale: Identifying organizational efficiencies & opportunities > Advertising: Implementing efforts that drive key results > Willingness to experiment: Fostering a culture that embraces experimentation > Brand: Consistently communicating the brands story through various channels > Company culture: Integration with HR and recruitment efforts > Business model innovation: Leveraging research & experiments to drive change The lack of focus on these areas is why most CMOs tenure is 41 months. Many marketers over prioritize landing an award at Cannes or a keynote presentation at a conference rather than prioritizing the ways in which they can support their team to develop a content engine or better alignment between marketing and sales. One area that falls under “Brand” but didn’t make this chart worthy of discussion is the role of search engine optimization (SEO) in the buying cycle. It could be argued that SEO deserves its own section as a structural deterrence for competition as SERP (Search Engine Results Page) dominance can act as a Moat that allows some brands to maintain and sustain organic results. What Is SERP Dominance? SERP dominance is when a brand has invested so strategically into content & SEO that they have captured a placement in search results for the vast majority of search terms associated with their market and ideal customers. In many industries, media companies dominate the SERP as they were early to recognize the value of organic traffic and the ability to turn that traffic into paid opportunities (ie. subscriptions, affiliates, emails, ads, etc). Gaining dominance in the SERP is an ambitious goal and one that smart organizations are realizing is worthy of pursuit. Meghan Keaney Anderson of Hubspot offered a great perspective when discussing how Hubspot views their Enterprise Marketing Playbook: With our SEO strategy, we’re not just playing for top placement in SERPs, we’re targeting the entire first page — ads, featured snippets, top organic results, directory listings, you name it. The results: Growth in our organic traffic, and a blog readership that is in the realm of major publications like HBR, Adweek and Fast Company. Over the last few years, some of the most successful software companies have achieved SERP dominance and fully leveraged SEO as a Moat. Hubspot is certainly one of those brands generating more than $8M worth of traffic through organic channels on the back of more than 260,000 different keywords like “inbound marketing”, “marketing funnels”, “marketing software” and other variations that would be relevant to their buyers. Other SaaS brands that have done this well include companies like Canva who built a backlink empire and Salesforce who has benefit from legacy pages and content assets generating $6M worth of traffic per month.        In the chart below I show a few of the many companies that have unlocked SERP dominance in their respective space. Each of these organizations generate more than $7M worth of organic traffic to their site per year all through landing pages, tools, calculators & blog posts that are served to potential customers through Google. Optimizing conversion rates through traffic sources makes a significant difference in your company’s overall success. These companies have built a moat around their business through search and it’s assisted in their combined market cap of $654 billion. I’ve included Mayoclinic, Investopedia & The Balance as a reference point for what SERP dominance could potentially look like for SaaS companies embracing SEO as a moat. Media companies have done a great job at using content and SEO to extract value. It’s important for organizations to look to them for inspiration while also embracing innovation to sustain and capture even more value than they have been able to. The Risk of Creating An SEO Moat There’s no question that with this approach comes the risk of building on top of Google. We’ve all seen Google enter new markets, drop a bridge across an organization’s moat and enter without any friction. It’s one of the few trojan horses that every industry must consider when thinking long term about their existence and role in the market. In 2019, the CEO of TripAdvisor, Steve Kaufer answered a question about the role of SEO in their business and Google’s entrant into travel: There is an effect of Google and other search engines moving more and more into the travel space and that’s a bit of a hotel headwind we called out. Of course, it hits all of our business units, but we continue to look at the overall positive of how this traffic finds us, how we’re able to educate them on TripAdvisor. And then at some point if you want we can go into the rest of the initiatives that we’re doing to otherwise drive long-term loyal behavior of our customer base. Similarly, Expedia’s CEO Mark Okerstrom spoke on their earnings call about Google: What we saw was a continued shift of essentially the free links further down the page, by other modules that were inserted and ultimately a shift of traffic from the SEO channel over to some of the other products whether it’s flight metasearch or hotel metasearch over time. Now of course as related to the hotel product, the lodging product, we are able to pick up some of that volume and that ultimately resulted in spending more on sales and marketing than we had otherwise would have. We are happy with the returns that we saw on it, but ultimately, not as good returns as we would see from the SEO channel. This isn’t just influencing travel. In 2014, Genius (formerly known as Rap Genius for their lyrics site) raised $40M at a valuation just under $1B. At its peak in 2018, Genius was generating nearly 55M organic visits a month directly from Google. It was an early innovator in improving the user experience for learning the lyrics of songs and the meaning behind them. Today, Genius is estimated to generate 35M (20M fewer) organic visitors per month even though they have more content and more demand. Why? Google entered the market and started to deliver the content directly in the SERP: Side note: Genius did have a history for some blackhat SEO practices that may or may not have had an influence on this fall from grace in the SERP. Point being… SERP dominance while it’s a noble goal and can pay massive returns – it does come with risk. Mainly, the risk is associated with the companies who build their SERP dominance using content in a format that Google may want to emulate or offering a service that aligns with their product roadmap. Because SaaS companies don’t have a content-first revenue model (ex.online affiliates, information products & review sites) their value is captured through a transaction that happens later and harder for Google to replicate. This is why organizations like Fiverr are investing in SEO and building their moat. Today, they generate more than $1.4M worth of traffic organically per month because of their content assets. In their Q3 earnings call, the CEO talked directly about how SEO has played a role in driving an increase in buyers: When you look at the numbers at the active buyer growth on Fiverr, what you see there is an acceleration of three quarters in a row. And the majority or the biggest part of that was the organic trend. The investment that we’ve made on brand marketing paid off. The investment that we’ve done on SEO paid off. The introduction of industry stores paid off. Fiverr is building a moat. Not only from an SEO lens but also through brand marketing. Brand is still important. It’s often overlooked but when you combine brand excellence with content excellence – the return and competitive moat that is built can be a strong deterrent for competitors. You see: While algorithms may change… Traffic volumes may change… And the value of backlinks may even change… The ability to connect with people long term through a meaningful brand connection will always be at the heart of marketing. The Moat that you establish through brand development is very real and should be reinforced with an effort to accomplish SERP dominance. Once the SERP is dominated; you have to deliver a valuable product, valuable services & on the front end – valuable content. Content that is loved. Products that are loved. And services that are loved.


Content
Content is a critical part of almost every SaaS SEO strategy. These articles break down the strategy behind high-performing content built for various parts of the buyer journey and SEO strategy.
6. Steal Your Competitor's Customers Using Comparison Pages
Tell me this…
Are you tired of your competitors hogging all the attention, even though you know you have a superior product?
Or how about this…
Are you losing customers because your competitors are slashing prices and you can’t afford to do that?
If you nodded yes then let me tell you, you’re not the first and you’re certainly not alone. Entrepreneurs have been facing these issues for time immemorial, but the good news is — solutions are available.
Now what if I told you…
You can steal some of your competitor’s customers day after day, without needing to lift a finger. Would it help balance the scales a bit?
If it would, then you’re at the right spot because in this article I’ll show you how you can set up a system that will run on autopilot and will move ready-to-buy customers away from your competitors… to you, without you needing to maintain a constant oversight. Sounds promising? Let’s get into it…
Product Comparison Pages With Competitors
The idea is to create competitor comparison landing pages that will present a comparison between you and your competitor’s product. You can create one or more of them for each competitor.
As the name suggests, competitor comparison landing pages are designed to publicly present an honest and comprehensive comparison between two or more competing products in the market. But how does that help?
You know buyers have a habit of comparing products before they finalize one. They’ll do it no matter what, so why not make it simpler for them?
If you publish a product comparison page, you not only help the buyers in their research process but also project values of honesty and transparency, which go a long way in establishing trust. And remember, building trust is the first step in convincing a person to buy from you.
Now you may ask, but what if my product isn’t better, wouldn’t then I be promoting my competitor if I create a comparison page?
Fair enough, that’s an important problem to handle. I see two options here:
* if your product doesn’t have a USP or a use case that’s far better than your competitors then maybe you should skip creating a comparison page. Because indeed you may end up promoting your competitors. But this also suggests that your product belongs to the me-too category if you don’t have a USP. Keep that in mind.
* if your product has a USP, you can create effective comparison pages where you highlight and repeat your USP prominently and downplay your weaknesses. However, you should be honest in your comparison because nothing weakens the trust more than misinformation.
BONUS DOWNLOAD: Throughout this article, I’ll show you examples of competitor comparison pages. You can download the 14 examples mentioned in this article + 65 other comparison pages in a free ebook. Download Now »
Who Can Take Advantage of Competitor Comparison Landing Pages?
At this point, you should note that product comparison landing pages are more prevalent in the SaaS industry because it is simpler to objectively compare SaaS products based on a set of tangible features. This is why the comparison pages can also be used in other industries and sectors, like:
* telecommunication: a mobile network carrier comparing their monthly/yearly plans against their competitors
* healthcare: medical device manufacturers can compare their products
* renewable energy: solar panel manufacturers can compare their products
* insurance providers: can compare different kind of insurance schemes available in the market, etc
* electronics (computers & gaming): can compare different laptop models and even gaming consoles.
However, let’s consider its usage in a traditional business like the Restaurant industry…
Their landing pages would also contain comparison on tangible features like the cuisine options, menu, opening and closing time, cost, etc but they’ll also have intangible features for comparison, like ambiance, food quality, service quality, for which there’s only one objective metric i.e. user feedback. And overwhelmingly all user feedback is accumulated on restaurant aggregator platforms like Zomato and Yelp.
More importantly, small restaurants are overly dependent on restaurant aggregators for sales and thus rarely focus on establishing their own online presence. So inadvertently, the decision to prominently use comparison pages as a tool for growth is in the hands of restaurant aggregators, and if they aren’t using it, that either means they haven’t discovered the opportunity yet or they believe it isn’t beneficial for consumers. However, I would argue that it is in fact useful for consumers. How?
Let’s say you want to go out for dinner tonight, consider the decision making path to decide on a restaurant:
1. You’ll open a restaurant aggregator app,
2. filter the restaurants based on your preferences for cuisines, location, etc,
3. narrow the list to 3-5 restaurants and then open individual profiles of each restaurant to explore their offerings, read reviews and check for other services,
4. finally, you pick one that best fits your criteria.
See, at step 3 there’s a clear use case for restaurant comparison pages to compare the shortlisted restaurants on each tangible and intangible factor. The UI might be complicated, specifically on a mobile app, but I believe there’s a way.
Returning from our detour, let’s talk about some other important reasons why you should create competitor comparison landing pages.
3 More Reasons To Create Competitor Comparison Pages
#1 – Filters out bad customers: If you present an honest comparison the visitors would clearly understand your strengths, weaknesses, and USP as well as your competitor’s.
If they decide to choose your product, that indicates their priorities are more aligned with your USP, which makes them your ideal customer. Visitors who prefer your competitors will be filtered out, saving you from low-quality customers who would later add to your business cost.
#2 – High conversion rates: If a person is at the comparison page, it is reasonable to assume that they’re in the final stages of deciding which product to buy. If they were in the early stages of their purchase cycle, they would more likely be looking for information on what constitutes a good product.
A high-converting sales funnel takes the buyer through three major steps:
 Basic Sales Funnel 

Even though all three stages of the sales funnel are important, this strategy focuses on the visitors who are at the bottom of the funnel and ready to buy. This is why if you design the right comparison page, you’ll reach potential customers at the most crucial stage of decision making, resulting in higher conversions.
#3 – Long-term SEO value: The sooner you create a comparison page the better because over time as your product becomes popular, more people will start looking for a comparison between you and your competitors. Having a page already published with the right keywords will help your landing page rank at the top of Google search for keywords related to you and your competitors. Keywords like:
* [your product] vs [competitor product]
* [competitor product] alternatives
* [competitor product] reviews, etc
This also means that you get to control the narrative for the ready-to-buy visitors who land on your comparison page. And if you do it right, you’ll end up creating a major source of revenue.
A quick observation
Before we move to optimize your comparison pages, I should underline an important point that I hope you’d have caught yourself. The visitors landing on your comparison page will consist of two groups:
* customers looking for a product like yours for the first time
* customers already using a product but want to switch to something better
You’ll need to target both these groups by addressing their hopes and concerns on your comparison pages.
How to make competitor comparison pages more effective?
Finally, let’s discuss where do things go wrong. You may think you’ve made the best comparison page ever but ideas born out of just one mind can certainly be improved with feedback.
For starters, you should do the basic housecleaning and go through this 38-point checklist to ensure you’ve covered all the fundamental principles in your landing page copy.
Download Checklist
After that, dive into the following guidelines to optimize your competitor comparison pages:


42 Landing Page Optimization Experiments That Can Easily Double Your Conversions Within A Month
And add thousands of dollars (even millions) to your Annual Recurring Revenue by investing merely 10 hours per week and without spending an extra dime
  

“reliable and effective experiments”
  

“exactly what I needed”
  

“I actually doubled my conversions”
FREE PLAYBOOK
885+ marketers have downloaded it already
DOWNLOAD THE PLAYBOOK NOW


#1 – Create multiple comparison pages
You can choose to compare your product against all your competitors on one landing page or create individual comparison pages for each competitor.
The latter approach will give you more SEO opportunities since every individual page could be SEO optimized for one of your competitors. Toast POS is a good example, they created a comparison page for every competitor and collated all of them in a hub of comparison pages.
Another company Podia took it to the next level by adopting both approaches simultaneously. They created a combined comparison page featuring all their main competitors and also listed the individual comparison pages on the same page.
#2 – Incorporate trust-building elements
First-time web visitors are usually skeptical and will remain so until you give them a solid reason to trust you. These trust-building reasons can be in the form of customer testimonials, case studies, awards, customer logos, security seals or any other element that establishes social trust.
Let’s talk about customer testimonials in particular because there are two wonderful strategies that I want you to know:
* Let your customers speak for you: instead of blowing your own trumpet, let your customers be your advocate. Basecamp perfected this strategy on their before & after landing page, where they collated 1000 responses from their customers to two simple questions.
a) How did it feel to manage projects before switching to Basecamp?
b) What changed for the better since switching to Basecamp?
Needless to say, this page must be sucking customers in like a black hole.
   * Use targeted testimonials: specifically on individual comparison pages where you’re comparing your product with only one competitor. Instead of using a generic testimonial, use one from the customer who switched to your product from that specific competitor. Toast POS does that on their comparison page with Square.
 testimonial on toast vs square comparison page 
#3 – Don’t promote competitors unwittingly
A comparison page is a double-edged sword so you have to be careful that you don’t end up promoting your competitors. To avoid this, keep the following pointers in mind:
      1. Don’t use competitor’s logo: instead, just use their brand name and that too as sparingly as possible. Make sure to use the correct letter casing in the brand name. For example, don’t write “MailChimp” when it should be “Mailchimp”.
      2. Specify trademark: if a brand name is trademarked and they use ® symbol, don’t skip it. In fact, take an extra step and add a short phrase mentioning that the trademarks belong to the respective owners.
      3. Specify the date of comparison: mention the date on which the comparison was made so the reader knows how up-to-date or outdated the comparison is. And it also protects you from being called a liar in case the competitor updates their product information that you didn’t include on your comparison page.
      4. Provide proof: users know that you’ll be biased to some extent since you’ve created the comparison page. To eliminate this skepticism, provide proof by linking to third-party websites that supports the claim you’re making. Sendinblue does this well on their comparison page against Mailchimp.
 sendinblue vs mailchimp comparison page proof 3rd party websites 
Another fine example is presented by Intercom on the Intercom vs Zendesk page. The competitor’s brand name Zendesk is used only thrice throughout the page, so as to not give them undue exposure while also being clear who is Intercom comparing themselves to.
#4 – Use comparison tables
Tables comparing your product vs competitor’s are the lifeblood of any product comparison page. It’s the simplest visual tool to present the most comprehensive comparison. However, if your product lack features, the comparison table may end up helping your competitors instead. Check out the following examples to figure out your own approach to designing a comparison table:
         * Short & concise table like Toast POS: Toast keeps it simple. It has a standard comparison table with 5 key pointers. However, these 5 pointers change with every competitor based on the strengths and weaknesses of Toast. See Toast vs TouchBistro page and Toast vs Revel Systems. Toast also adds at least one feature that’s available in their own product as well in their competitor to give the table a tinge of fairness.
         * Multiple contextual tables like Hubspot: Hubspot is a massive tool with extensive features. If they create a single table to compare all the features, the table will probably have more than a hundred rows. So instead of bombarding readers with a giant table (unlike Formstack), they categorize and group features based on user lifecycle stages (awareness, lead nurturing and performance analysis). This allows them to present multiple comparison tables thus easing the cognitive burden on the reader while still covering the complete feature set. See Hubspot vs Marketo comparison page.
         * Price comparison table like Sendinblue: If you have an advantage on pricing, you should absolutely highlight it using a price comparison table, as Sendinblue does on the Sendinblue vs Mailchimp page. But don’t skip the feature/benefit comparison table.
 price comparison table sendinblue vs mailchimp 
#5 – Address the 4 forces of product switch
According to The ReWired Group, there are 4 forces that affect customer’s decision making when they are switching to a new product. Your goal is to align all the 4 forces in your favour. It will reduce friction and customers would readily make a switch to your product.
 4 forces influencing customers during product switch 

As the diagram shows, two forces are aiding the users to make the switch and two are pulling them back. So let’s examine each of them and see how you can use them to your advantage:
Force 1 – Problem(s) with the current product 
To strengthen this force, highlight the problems of your competitor’s product. However, this can be tricky because bad-mouthing your competitor reflects badly on you too. But there’s another way out…
Do an honest comparison with your competitor’s product and explain to your readers how the shortcoming/problem in competitor’s product will adversely affect them. Then further agitate the problem. Finally, explain how your product will solve the same problem. This is called the PAS Copywriting Framework.
A good example of this can be found on the comparison page of Mailchimp vs Campaign Monitor under the section “Mailchimp’s 2019 Updates to Their Terms of Use” which highlights the recent updates in Mailchimp pricing and how it will impact their customers.
Alternatively, if you want to highlight the problem visually, you should scan through the product-review websites like G2, TrustRadius, Capterra and analyze the product reviews of your competitor. Find the reviews that mentioned the problem you’re trying to highlight on your comparison page and use its screenshot. Say you have a web analytics product and you’re creating a comparison page between your product and Mixpanel. All you have to do is, visit the review page of Mixpanel on G2 and take screenshot of a review that highlights the shortcoming of Mixpanel you want to focus on in your comparison page. Something like this…
 Mixpanel-review-on-G2-poor-cs 
Force 2 – Attraction of the new product
To strengthen this force, you’ll need to effectively emphasize the USP of your product.
If you use the PAS copywriting formula, you can cover this aspect at the last step of explaining your solution.
However, if PAS formula doesn’t fit then you should try an alternate approach, similar to what Formstack did on their Formstack vs SurveyMonkey comparison page.
Formstack knew that competing with SurveyMonkey on its core feature of building surveys would not be a winning strategy. So instead, they targeted customers looking to create more than one type of form and the ones who needed additional features around survey builder, which is what Formstack excelled at. So instead of targeting everybody, Formstack presented the situation in which their product will work much better than their competitors. You can do the same.
 Formstack-vs-surveymonkey-comparison-page 

Pro-Tip
You can jointly address both the above forces by creating a comparison page similar to the Basecamp example I showed you above. It will address both these forces because it answers the exact questions these two forces are built on.
            * How did it feel to manage projects before switching to Basecamp? ⟶ customers will highlight the problem they faced using the old solution.
            * What changed for the better since switching to Basecamp? ⟶ customer will highlight how Basecamp solved that specific problem for him, automatically bringing focus to the USP of Basecamp. 
Force 3 – Anxiety and uncertainty of change
To strengthen this force, you’ll need to assure people that transition will be quick, effortless and free.
The goal of your comparison page is twofold. You not only have to convince visitor to choose you over your competitor, you also have to facilitate the data migration of the visitor from his current solution to your product and make it as smooth, effortless and fast as possible.
Best way to achieve this outcome is to directly integrate a migration feature into your product so it’s quick and easy for users to import their data.
Notion.so has an impressive Evernote importer which leaves users mesmerized.
 evernote-to-notion-importer-gif 

Another interesting example can be found on Zendesk vs Desk.com comparison page. If you scroll to the bottom, the call to action button is accompanied with a free migration guide to help new users migrate their existing data easily.
 zendesk-vs-desk-comparison-page-free-migration-guide 

On Podia vs LearnDash comparison page, Podia dedicates a full section to highlight their free migration service.
 podia-vs-learndash-comparison-free-migration 

Force 4 – Existing habits and allegiances
To overcome this force, you’ll need to overcome the force of inertia and the user’s desire to remain in the status quo.
Every time customers switch to a new product, their existing habits and allegiances makes the switching considerably difficult because of inertia.
Inertia is a property which opposes any agency that attempts to put it in motion or, if it is moving, to change the magnitude or direction of its velocity. Inertia is a passive property and does not enable a body to do anything except oppose such active agents as external forces.
So how to overcome customer’s irrational attachment to their current solution and their desire to stick with the status quo?
One solution is to deploy a logical fallacy. Appeal to Vanity is a logical fallacy that appeals to a person’s vanity, pride or self-esteem, in order to get the person to buy something or do something or give up something.
Famously, Apple used this strategy to encourage people to buy Mac over a PC by depicting PC users as uncool compared to Mac users.
L’Oreal has its slogan based on this fallacy – “Because you’re worth it.”
And in fact, it is not a new concept. People have been appealing to the vanity for the longest time as depicted in the short tale The Emperor’s New Suit written by Danish author Hans Christian Andersen. The story is about two swindlers who arrived in a kingdom whose emperor was obsessed with clothes. They fooled the emperor and everyone else by convincing them that they possess special clothing material which will be invisible to any man who was unfit for his office or unpardonably stupid.
How to steal your competitor’s customers on autopilot?
Now comes the fun part. Once you’re done optimizing your comparison pages, SEO will take its own sweet time to kick in but you don’t need to wait.
You can bring your comparison pages directly in front of potential customers through Google advertising. All you’d need to do is, start a Google Adwords campaign to target your competitors’ brand keywords in Google Search Ads. Keywords like:
            * [competitor product name]
            * [competitor product] reviews
            * [competitor product] alternatives
            * [your product] vs [competitor product]
            * similar to [competitor product]
This means every time someone searches for one of the above keywords, your ad will show up right at the top, even before your competitor’s organic listing. This will expose your page to your competitors’ potential customers as well as existing customers.
After initial testing and optimization of your search ad campaign, you can leave it on autopilot with a fixed weekly/monthly budget and it will continue to bring ready-to-buy customers to you.
Pro-Tip
You should also run an ad campaign on your own brand keywords otherwise your competitor can take advantage of the same strategy against you. And when you run a campaign on your own brand name, your ad would almost always show up first before your competitor’s (if they’re targeting your brand keywords) because of the relevance factor, since your website is more relevant on your brand name than any other website.


7. How to Find and Map Keywords to the Buyer's Journey
People rarely just search for whatever you sell, click on your website, and buy right away.
In fact, 71% of them start their research with a generic search. They’re reading blog posts, watching videos, consuming reviews, asking their friends, participating in communities—before they even begin to consider your product.
So unless you’re creating content that buyers are searching for early on, it’s likely that you’re not even going to be in the consideration set. But if you can appear in the early stages of the buyer’s journey, you get the opportunity to educate them and influence their decision-making.
In this post, you’ll learn the following:
            * What is the buyer’s journey?
            * What are the stages of the buyer’s journey?
            * How to create content for the buyer’s journey
What is the buyer’s journey?
The buyer’s journey is the process a person goes through before making a purchase.
What are the stages of the buyer’s journey?
There are three stages:
            * Awareness – The buyer realizes they have a problem. They want to understand more about it.
            * Consideration – The buyer is looking for and comparing potential solutions to their problem.
            * Decision – The buyer purchases a solution.
 Infographic of 3 stages of buyer's journey: awareness, consideration, and decision   

How to create content for the buyer’s journey
The purpose of understanding the buyer’s journey is to create content for each stage.
Let’s look at how to do that.
Step 1. Create buyer persona(s)
A buyer persona is a “fictional person” you create who represents the common characteristics of your customer. Knowing what they’re looking for will help you create the right kind of content.
Creating a buyer persona is not a thought exercise. Unfortunately, many companies treat it as such. They identify personas based on imagination, fill up a document, and tuck it in the recesses of a Google Drive somewhere, never to be seen again.
Buyer personas need to be based on real-world evidence. So rather than sitting in a meeting room and conjuring them up, we need to get outside.
Here’s the three-step process content marketer Adrienne Barnes recommends:
            * Get to know your customers – Find your best customers and call them. These are the customers who knew immediately how your product worked or have been using your product without any complaints. Ask them questions about your product, what they like/dislike, the problems they have, their responsibilities, and so on. (Alternatively, you can survey them.)
            * Organize the data – Look for patterns among the responses. You’re looking out for commonly repeated phrases, words, and remarks.
            * Segment the audience – From the patterns you’ve gathered, you should start to see some specific audiences popping out of the data. These will be your buyer personas.
Recommended reading: How to Create a Buyer Persona for Your Business
Step 2. Find topics that match each stage of the buyer’s journey
Let’s illustrate this step via an example. We’ll use Billy Blogger as our buyer persona. Billy wants to build a revenue-generating blog so that he can quit his full-time job.
We’ll start by considering Billy’s potential journey, constructed from customer feedback and data:
 Timeline showing potential buyer's journey of Billy. Based on the 3 aforementioned stages  

Awareness
In this stage, Billy realizes he has a problem: His site is not getting enough traffic. So he searches for ways to get more traffic to his site. He learns about the various traffic acquisition methods and decides that SEO could be the solution to his problem. He begins researching and learning more about SEO.
So, if we’re creating content for this stage, we’re actually looking for topics related to:
            * Blog traffic
            * Website traffic
            * SEO
Here’s how to find more relevant topics:
            * Go to Ahrefs’ Keywords Explorer
            * Enter those terms
            * Go to the Matching terms report
Since the “Awareness stage” keywords are mostly informational, we’ll switch the toggle to Questions.
 Matching terms report results  

To find more keywords, add informational modifiers (e.g., tips, learn, resource, guide, examples, ideas) in the Include box.
 Dropdown text field to add informational modifiers in Matching terms report 

There are over 30,000 keywords, and not all of them are going to align with our buyer persona. So we’ll look through the list and pick out those keywords that are relevant.
For example, the topic “how to drive traffic to your website” is likely a topic Billy is searching for at this stage. And we’ve targeted that topic with a blog post.
Consideration
In this stage, Billy realizes he needs a tool to do SEO. He begins looking for the type of tools that are available. As he encounters each product, he makes comparisons (e.g., reads reviews). If there are free versions, he’ll test the different tools out.
If we’re creating content for this stage, we’re actually looking for topics related to:
            * SEO tools.
            * Tools for each aspect of SEO (e.g., keyword research tools, link building tools).
            * Free versions of tools (e.g., free backlink checker).
            * Our brand name.
            * Our competitors’ brand names.
Here’s how to find relevant topics:
            * Go to Ahrefs’ Keywords Explorer
            * Enter terms like “seo tools,” “ahrefs,” or “moz”
            * Go to the Matching terms report
            * In the Include box, add comparison modifiers (e.g., vs, versus, best, top, review, reviews)
 Dropdown text field to add comparison modifiers in Matching terms report  

We’ll look through the list and pick out the topics that are relevant. For example, we can see from the list that potential customers are comparing our toolset with our competitors’ (e.g., ahrefs vs semrush). Thus, we decided to create a comparison page that addresses all of these topics.
Decision
In this stage, Billy is close to buying. He’s eyeing our tool, looking at the list of features, hesitating on pricing, and taking our toolset for a spin.
If we’re creating content for this stage, we’re actually looking for topics related to our brand.
To do this, simply enter the brand name into Keywords Explorer and eyeball the list.
 Matching terms report results  

Now, if you’re a small brand, you may not find many keywords for your brand name. If so, take a look at your Google Search Console data for the things people are searching for that relate to your brand.
Finally, in this stage, people won’t always be using search engines to find the information they need. After all, they’ve likely decided on your brand and may simply be looking for that information on your website. Rather than focus too much on the keywords they’re searching for, look internally.
Scan your internal site search data, talk to your customer support and sales teams, and so on. Figure out what is holding the buyers back from clicking “buy” on your website. That is the content you need to create.
”IMPORTANT”
While the process is pretty straightforward, using modifiers will usually leave many keywords on the table. Thus, it’s a good idea to look through keyword ideas that don’t contain any modifiers and consider whether they’re worth targeting.
You can do this by looking through the reports without using any modifiers.
For example, doing this shows us a few topics that we could potentially target, such as “seo course” and “seo checklist”—both of which do not contain any modifiers we’ve used thus far.
 List of keywords  

Recommended reading: Keyword Research: The Beginner’s Guide by Ahrefs
Step 3. Create content for each stage
Now that you have the topics for each stage of the buyer’s journey, it’s time to create content for them.
It is likely you’ll have to create different types of content for the different stages. For example, in the Awareness stage, buyers are looking for information, e.g., blog posts, videos, etc. Whereas for the Consideration stage, buyers are comparing, so they may be looking for category pages or comparison pages.
The easiest way to figure out what kind of content you should create is to analyze the top-ranking pages for the three Cs of search intent.
1. Content type
Content types usually fall into one of five buckets: blog post, product, category, landing page, or video. For example, all the top-ranking pages for “how to increase blog traffic” are blog posts.
 Google SERP of "how to increase blog traffic" 

Whereas for “backlink checker,” they’re all landing pages.
 Google SERP of "backlink checker" 

2. Content format
This mostly applies to blog posts, which are usually how-tos, listicles, news articles, opinion pieces, or reviews. For example, the top-ranking results for “link building” are mostly guides:
 Google SERP of "link building"  

3. Content angle
This refers to the main selling point of the content. For example, people searching for “best SEO tools” want the results to be fresh:
 Google SERP of "best seo tools" 

Step 4. Add appropriate calls to action for each piece of content
If you’re creating “Awareness stage” content, it’s not useful to try and sell your product right away. After all, the buyer has only just discovered their problem and is at the stage of researching.
Instead, you should add calls to action (CTAs) that are appropriate for the next stage. (In this case, it’s Consideration.)
So, for example, rather than promote our pricing page to someone who’s just learning SEO, we can introduce our suite of free tools instead. That way, potential customers can get acquainted with what we do and how our tools work. Alternatively, we can encourage them to sign up for our newsletter to learn more about SEO.
If your content is for the Consideration stage, you may want to link to your trial or collect potential customers’ contact information so that your sales team can reach out.
Final thoughts
While it may be presented as a linear stage model, the buyer’s journey never really works that way in real life.
Just think about your own behavior. Do you follow such a clean linear progression when buying something? Unless it’s an impulse buy, probably not. You probably bounce around each stage as you research, go about your day, hesitate, try stuff out, forget about it, research some more, etc.
While this model does ensure you’re creating content for each stage so that potential buyers can discover you, bear in mind that it is not perfect.




8. The SaaS Website Content You Need to Close Sales
The SaaS Website Best Practices You Need to Close Sales [Data]
Mike Sonders • May 3, 2021
Organic search (i.e., Google) is one of the biggest B2B SaaS marketing channels.
And since there’s so much data available on the behavior of online searchers, we’ve got access to incredible insights on the SaaS market.
In this case, I’ve analyzed the online searches of thousands of B2B SaaS buyers to uncover exactly what information they want when considering a SaaS purchase.
Based on the results, I can comfortably say your website probably isn’t delivering everything SaaS buyers need.
I’m going to share the results of my analysis, and then show you how to translate the results into specific B2B SaaS website content that answers prospect questions, addresses their objections, and gives them the confidence to purchase.
So if you’re ready to pave the way for more lead generation and revenue, let’s get started.
Contents
            * A quick note on methodology
            * The results: What SaaS buyers are searching for
            * SaaS website best practices: Creating the content buyers want
            * Methodology & raw data
The recommendations in this post assume you’ve found product-market fit. Otherwise, building out your website content perhaps shouldn’t be at the top of your list of concerns.
A quick note on methodology
If you’d like to see my full research methodology, you can jump to the Methodology section at the end of the post.
In short: I selected ten well-known B2B SaaS brands from among the largest SaaS companies in the world. I then identified the ~16K branded searches (e.g., “hubspot pricing”, “servicenow login”, “zendesk support”, etc.) that people enter into Google to search for information on these brands.
 Branded keyword modifiers Among those ~16K branded search terms, I analyzed their modifiers to find the ones common to most of the ten SaaS brands. Of those common modifiers, I identified the ones that searchers use when considering a potential SaaS purchase.
E.g., “hubspot pricing” is a search that a potential buyer would use when considering a purchase; “hubspot investor relations” and “hubspot login” are not.
That is, I uncovered the search terms SaaS buyers use most commonly in the “consideration” phase of the buyer journey — when they’re gathering the information they need to decide (1) whether to make a purchase (i.e., convert) and (2) which vendor will get their money.
 SaaS conversion funnel Using median search volumes, I indexed the relative demand for the information implied by each “consideration” modifier.
 Branded search terms for SaaS reviews The median search volume for “reviews” keywords is 225.
The results: What SaaS buyers are searching for
Pre-sale
Search volumes for SaaS pricing information are so high–more than nine times higher than searches for “alternatives”–that including pricing data would have blown out the scale of a consolidated chart.
So, I show here the results across two charts, indexing to the demand for “alternatives” information in both:
    It’s no coincidence that this chart looks like a bisected funnel.
Generally speaking, most buyers start their journey at the top of this list (with pricing) and proceed downward. As buyers fail to find satisfactory information that matches up with their needs, they fall out of the funnel.
For example:
            * If the price is out of budget range, they’re going to be much less interested in getting a demo.
            * If the demo goes poorly (or simply shows that the solution doesn’t their your requirements), there’s not much reason to explore integrations.
            * If the solution doesn’t offer the specific integrations they need, getting a free trial is likely moot.
The path of the B2B buyer journey certainly varies. Still, this chart paints a clear picture regarding the relative importance of different features, resources, and information SaaS buyers are seeking.
Correspondingly, you can use these data to prioritize the content (and features!) you create to keep buyers in your funnel and convince them that you’re the best solution.
Please note: it’s not that lower relative demand for certain information (e.g. “free trial) means that the information isn’t important. (Offering a free trial, if possible, is very important!) To some degree, it simply means there are fewer potential buyers left in the funnel at that stage seeking that information.
Want a PDF summary of the data?
Submit your email and I’ll send you a 2-page PDF summary of the most important charts from this post.
GET YOUR PDF SUMMARY
I respect your inbox. Unsubscribe at any time.
Pre- and post-sale
There’s a set of your resources–like your API documentation or support site–that your existing customers will Google instead of trying to find on your site.
So, it’s not just potential buyers creating the search demand for the following terms.
But I know from my experience that SaaS buyers oftentimes want to make sure these resources are available before they’ll pull the trigger on any purchase.   
And (robustly) providing these resources is not only an excellent way to close more sales — it sets your customers up to succeed with your product, thereby improving your retention rates.
  In the next sections, I’ll show you best practices for putting these data into action as compelling content on your website.
SaaS website best practices: Creating the content buyers want
Now we know what information is important to B2B SaaS buyers in the consideration phase of the buyer journey.
There are quite a few best practices when it comes to presenting this information on your website, so you might want to jump directly to the sections that address gaps in your content strategy:
            * Pricing
            * Alternatives
            * Demo
            * Reviews
            * Reporting
            * Integrations
            * Vs.
            * Customers
            * Security
            * SSO
            * Free trial
            * SLA
            * Features
            * About
            * Why
            * Sales
            * API
            * Support
            * Mobile app
Pricing
 Help Scout pricing page It makes sense that there’s a steep drop-off in demand for pricing information versus any other purchase-consideration information.
Pricing information is among the easiest to find on a SaaS website, and it’s a very straightforward litmus test that kicks off (or puts an abrupt stop to) the buying process:
Is the price low enough for me to consider, or is it so expensive that I shouldn’t even bother continuing to look into this solution?
Pricing can also put off a potential customer when it’s too confusing or when it’s simply missing from the website.
Confusing pricing
Do your pricing plans compare apples to apples? Your mileage will vary, but I’ve helped a client double their conversion rate by simply clarifying the pricing page. (Those links point to threads of mine on Twitter where I provide more details.)
Missing pricing
You might (or might not) have good reasons for not providing pricing information on your website.
To avoid unnecessarily driving away potential customers, consider these alternative approaches formulated by Joel Klettke.
Alternatives
It makes logical sense that someone considering a meaningful purchase would want to uncover and evaluate all the appropriate alternatives.
That’s why a lot of people in the beginning of the SaaS buyer journey Google things like “[brand] alternative”, “[brand] competitors”, and “alternatives to [brand]”.
In the SaaS world, the search results for these queries tend to be dominated by listicles from the software comparison sites like Capterra, G2, and TrustRadius.
So your most important step is to make sure your app has a profile on the comparison sites that appear when someone searches on “[your_brand] alternatives”. And, of course, populate those profiles with positive reviews from customers — which I’ll discuss in a section below.
You should also consider or experiment with paying for better surfacing of your app on those comparison sites. It’s not uncommon for paid campaigns like these to be a top source of leads for SaaS startups.
You can (and should) rank a page from your own site for these “alternatives” queries, whether someone is searching for alternatives to your brand, or to one of your competitors.
I recommend following both of these methods:
The Best [Competitor] Alternative
 Plivo best alternative page Create a page on your marketing site or blog that positions your solution as the “Best [Competitor] Alternative”, where [Competitor] is a well-known brand in your vertical against whom you can position yourself effectively.  
Start with the most well-known of your competitors, as more people will be searching for alternatives for them.
Here are a few examples of pages that follow this method and rank among the top search results for their respective “[competitor] alternatives” searches:
            * Twilio Alternative | The best alternative to Twilio API | Plivo
            * One Of The Best Pipedrive Alternatives | Salesmate CRM
            * A simpler, and smarter Zendesk alternative – SupportBee
[Your_brand] Alternatives
 Jira alternatives page Yes, like JIRA, you can have a page on your site that lists your competitors.
Why?
One, prospective buyers are going to discover your competitors, anyway.
Two, when someone is searching for alternatives to your solution, appearing in the search results at least gives you a chance to position yourself relative to your competition. To present your relative strengths and clarify your best-fit customer.
Otherwise, you’re letting your competitors or a 3rd-party site like Capterra define your positioning for you.
 JIRA alternatives search results Atlassian has the fourth organic result when people search for alternatives to their product, JIRA.
Surprisingly, not many of the big SaaS brands–other than JIRA and Salesforce–have implemented this defensive strategy.  
Demo
Prospects want to see your solution in action. There’s a reason “Schedule a Demo” and similar are such common calls to action (CTAs) on SaaS websites–especially for sales-driven (vs. self-service) products.
 Churn Buster request a demo page But maybe you’ve got a relatively low-priced solution and it doesn’t make sense to schedule live demos with every prospect.
In that case, consider recording a demo and posting the video to a “demo” page on your website.
And I’d recommend uploading that demo to YouTube and giving the video a straightforward title.
Search results for “[brand] demo” typically feature video packs, and those video packs sometimes appear even before the brand’s own, relevant website content.
Having demo content on your website and on YouTube gives you a chance to own more real estate in search results, thereby giving you a better chance to own the narrative.
 Shartsheet demo in search results Smartsheet created demo content on both its website and on YouTube, allowing it to dominate the first search results for “smartsheet demo”.
Reviews
In competitive industries, search results for “[brand] reviews” are dominated by the big review-aggregation sites like G2, Capterra, and TrustRadius.
That’s why it’s so important for SaaS brands to monitor and (ethically) manage the reviews on those sites.
Some companies systematize the process of getting reviews from happy customers. If you’re already doing NPS surveys, for example, consider asking your high-scoring customers to give you a review.
In turn, you can use your reviews from those third-party sites as social proof on your marketing pages.
 Social proof for Propeller CRM Propeller CRM highlights their review scores on their home page as social proof.
Even though the 3rd-party review-aggregation sites are very important for “[brand] reviews” searches, your site isn’t precluded from showing up in those results. Consider creating a “reviews” page on your site.
Hubspot’s customer reviews page ranks in the fourth position for searches on “hubspot reviews”, and sometimes even claims the featured snippet:
 Hubspot reviews featured snippet Which means their content appears before G2’s, Capterra’s, and everyone else’s, giving them a chance to influence the narrative.
Looking for actionable SaaS marketing insights?
Subscribe to my newsletter for more original research, frameworks, and data-driven tactics -- all with a focus on SaaS marketing. Published once or twice per month.
SUBSCRIBE
I respect your inbox. Unsubscribe at any time.
Reporting
Some of the people searching for “[brand] reporting” will be existing customers looking for the link to your dashboard.
But your buyers will frequently include individual contributors or managers who have to spend some amount of their time reporting up the management chain within their companies. They’re very interested in your built-in reporting capabilities.
 Pipedrive reporting page The more time they have to spend gathering performance data and presenting them, the less time they have to do their actual jobs.
They want to know that your product will help them quickly (1) identify important analytics insights, and (2) report those insights, including charts and graphs.
That’s why searches for “[brand] dashboard” and “[brand] analytics” are such common search patterns for SaaS providers.
  Sometimes, being able to cut-and-paste images from your product dashboard into an email or slide is enough for these folks.
Regardless, it’s a smart move to have dedicated content on your marketing site that details your product’s analytics and reporting capabilities.
And screenshots of your sexy dashboard design never hurt.
Examples:
            * Analytics Portal – Call Tracking Metrics, Call History, and Real-Time Analytics | RingCentral
            * Dashboard & Reporting Software | HubSpot Add-On
            * Sales Reporting | Pipedrive
Integrations
Your buyers don’t want to add more complexity to their internal workflows. How they perceive the value of your solution will depend on how well it integrates with their critical and most frequently-used apps.
According to the search data (which largely corresponds with my anecdotal experience), the most-sought integrations are for:
            * Slack
            * CRMs (SalesForce, by far)
            * Email
…but the most important integrations for your product will depend on its niche (internal communication, marketing automation, accounting, etc.) and on the tech stacks of your target customer(s).
Buyers of internal ticketing and support solutions like atSpoke have high integration requirements:
 atSpoke integrations page In some cases, Zapier support will be sufficient. Just make sure your solution’s integration capabilities are clearly outlined and easy-to-find on your website.
Vs.
Once a SaaS buyer has identified the alternatives in a given market, she’ll naturally want to compare those alternatives.
Which is why “[saas_brand1] vs. [saas_brand2]” Google searches are so pervasive.
 Help Scout vs. Zendesk page Often, one of the first recommendations I make to new clients is to create “vs.” content. People looking for this information are pretty low in the sales funnel — traffic to these landing pages tends to convert to free trials and demos rather well.
Even if you’re a small or new brand not enjoying a lot of branded SaaS traffic from search, these competitor-comparison pages are still very useful as marketing and sales collateral.
In my view, the features of an effective comparison page tend to include:
            * Highlighting of big differentiators. What are the handful of big things–that are meaningful to your target customer–that set your solution apart from the competition? Example: Zendesk vs Freshdesk 
            * Comparison tables. In many cases, website visitors scan information rather than read. Comparison tables make it easy for them to quickly understand the important differences between you and the competition. Examples: ConvertKit vs Drip, Hubspot vs Salesforce
            * Social proof. Don’t expect prospects to take your word for it when you’re singing your own praises — back it up with testimonials and reviews from customers. Example: Drift vs Intercom
            * Clarity around trade-offs. Everyone knows that every solution has its strengths and weaknesses. (In fact, “[brand] pros and cons” is a pretty common search term among big SaaS companies.) Being transparent about it only gives you more credibility. And gives you a chance to frame the narrative around your perceived weaknesses or “missing” features.
Further, being transparent about who your best-fit customers are (and aren’t)–in these pages and other content–is a good way to help make sure more of your leads are qualified.
Consider email marketing provider ConvertKit, whose content ranks in the second organic position when you search on “mailchimp vs convertkit”:
 ConvertKit vs Mailchimp search result ConvertKit’s “vs.” content makes it really clear who their target audience is, and isn’t.
For one reason or another, some companies are averse to talking about their competitors on their websites.
Personally, I think this is marketing negligence.
I think Dev sums the sentiment up nicely:
Customers
We all use the “if a bunch of people are using it, it must be good” heuristic, whether we realize it or not. Perceived demand makes things more desirable.
When SaaS buyers search for “[brand] customers”, they’re looking for that social proof: a number of companies are using your product, so it must be “good”.
(Having respected, well-known companies among your customers can compensate for a lack of quantity of customers. Our brains are funny.)
Even better if you can show specific examples that your customers have used your solution to solve challenges similar to the ones that your prospect is facing, in similar roles.
  After all, many buying decisions are emotional ones (look, social proof!) that we justify with logic (it has fixed problems like ours before for roles like mine!)
The ideal solution is to dedicate a landing page on your website to customer case studies.
 Okta customer case studies page Highlight the best-known of your customers at the top of the page, much as Okta has done on their customer page.
Security
In many cases, someone in an I.T. role is either your primary buyer, or will have sign-off authority on the purchase of your solution.
Among other things, these folks want to know that they can trust you with their company’s data and security, because their bosses are counting on them to protect the company.
And, by definition, a cloud-based software service won’t be behind the prospect’s firewall, so they won’t control security protocols or data handling.
If they approve a purchase of your solution, their job security and reputation is effectively in your hands. They want to know how you’re going to protect them from loss and litigation.
So, the security of your app and its associated policies merits a fair amount of thoughtfulness. Make sure you clearly document your security policies on your website.
 Docusign trust center page Unsurprisingly, given the sensitivity around information captured in its product, DocuSign has an entire section of its website dedicated to trust and security.
On that note: You know that privacy policy you created when you set up your website? Perhaps having copied some template?
Well, it turns out some buyers actually do care about what you say in that document.
  Not a lot of buyers, relative to the amount of ones interested in your general security policies and practices. But having a thoughtful and up-to-date privacy policy and GDPR on your site is about making sure your site content can handle all of the questions and objections your prospects might have.
(If you work with or want to work with customers in the medical field, they’ll want to know about your HIPAA compliance, too.)
SSO
If you’ve been on any sales calls with SaaS buyers, you know that offering single sign-on (SSO) is pretty much a table-stakes requirement these days.
 SaaS apps per employee data Source: Blissfully 2020 SaaS Trends Report
There are upwards of 17 workplace apps per employee in today’s companies, so a big part of the demand for SSO is driven by a really practical consideration: internal I.T. pros are already strapped for time, so fewer password reset requests means more time to get things done.
If your SaaS platform offers SSO, make sure this is clear on the website. Pricing and feature pages are usually good spots to highlight this.
Free Trial
A free trial isn’t appropriate for every SaaS solution — especially complex, enterprise-level products.
But if you conceivably can offer a free trial: do. And make sure that free-trial sign-up is easy to find on your website. Prospects generally want to try before they buy.
‘Nuff said.
SLA
I don’t often come across service level agreements (SLAs) on SaaS websites.
But prospects are looking for them. (Especially buyers from I.T. departments.)
Consider publishing your SLA on your website like Twilio and PagerDuty have done.
Otherwise, at least highlight your uptime commitment in your product pages and indicate that you do, indeed, offer an SLA.
Features
When someone searches for “[your_brand] features”, is your content the first result on Google?
This search pattern is another one where the Capterras and G2s of the world are trying to capture attention.
Don’t let them tell your story.
You might have several “feature” pages on your marketing site that each dive into a single, major component of your product offering.
But do you have a single page that neatly summarizes the major features of your solution? That helps a prospect easily understand the scope of your offering and confirm that it has everything they need?
 Slack features page That page is what many SaaS buyers are searching for.
Examples:
            * Jira Software – Features | Atlassian
            * Products by Category – ServiceNow
            * Features | Slack
About
I’ve pretty consistently found that when SaaS buyers are considering buying from a startup, one of their questions is:
Is this company going to be around for a while?
Startups fail all the time. It’s not a secret.
Buyers want to know that the effort they put forth–convincing management, setting up and integrating your solution, convincing employees to use it–is going to be worth it in the long run.
Does your company have meaningful funding? Well-known investors? Is it profitable and self-sustaining? Does it have experienced leadership?
In your SaaS business’s About Us page, make sure you convey anything that can reassure buyers that the company is robust and set up to thrive.
People also want to feel good about who they’re doing business with. Use the About Us page to humanize your company and signal your values.
Examples:
            * About – Airtable
            * About Us | Slack
            * About Us – Our Business Story – Deputy
Why
 Why Hubspot page I love this one. It’s so obvious once you think about it, but it’s so rarely done.
When someone is evaluating your SaaS product, working their way through all the information I’ve described, they’re fundamentally looking for the reasons why.
Why they should buy your software.
And some of them explicitly ask that question in “why [brand]” Google searches.
It’s so important for you to be able to answer that question. It should be the root from which your messaging sprouts, after all.
Make your most compelling pitch in a single page of content on your website. Include your top features and benefits, and social proof including testimonials, review scores from 3rd-party comparison sites, and logos of your best-known customers.
It’s a simple way to help convince your prospects–and to help them convince their internal stakeholders.
Examples:
            * Why Go HubSpot?
            * Why Choose Workday Financial Management, HR & Planning Software 
Sales
This one’s pretty straightforward.
Prospects want to contact your sales team when they have questions or when they’re ready to make a purchase. Make it easy for them to find sales contact info on your site.
If you don’t have a sales team, at least give folks ways to reach a human being at your SaaS company — via chat, email, whatever. Make it easy for them to get their questions answered, even if you’ve already got the answers on your site.  
API
This and “SDK” go hand-in-hand with the demand for integrations. Your prospects want to make sure your solution will play nicely with their existing workflows and tools, no matter how complex they are.
Even better if your product features automations that can speed up those workflows.
Support
Knowing that they’ll have access to quality support for your solution is very important to SaaS buyers.
They want to know that there are resources available to make the most of their purchase, including help for when they get stuck.
That’s why they’ll be reassured if you can provide active community forums, setup tutorials, wikis, and other (solid) documentation. (Including API documentation.)
Mobile app
Not much of an explanation needed here. More and more employees operate on-the-go, so buyers are looking for mobile-compatible solutions.
9. Why You Should Focus on Bottom of the Funnel First to Drive Signups
If you talk to content marketers at SaaS companies (both in-house and other agencies), almost everyone will tell you that you need to focus on top of the funnel content first.
Why?
Because most marketers assume everyone starts at the top of the funnel and slowly makes their way down the funnel via nurturing and more content.
The logic typically sounds like this: “Well first, the customer needs awareness: They need to know about the problem. Then, they need to consider different options: Look for solutions. Then they’ll convert: Sign up to try your solution.”
 top-of-funnel-content-marketing 

Yes, in theory, every single customer for any product goes through these stages.
But here is the big fallacy marketers fall prey to: Marketers think their company needs to be the one to educate all potential customers at every stage of the buyer’s journey, starting at the top. This is not true, and it results in a huge waste of resources on content marketing that does little to help get trials or demos.
In reality, unless your SaaS business is truly creating a completely new category (which is extremely rare, as we argue below), other companies and individuals have already educated a large number of your prospects on top of the funnel topics. These prospects already know why they need to invest in your category, who the big players are, and how it would help them. These educated prospects are not at the top of the funnel. They don’t need top of the funnel content. Yet they are the best prospects you have.
Another way of saying it is that most SaaS businesses sell to advanced customers — people who have been in their industry for years. They’re not starting from a knowledge level of zero. And therefore, most top of the funnel content (which usually covers introductory level “why this is important” or “ultimate guide to this niche” topics) is below their knowledge level — they already know all that stuff.
Therefore, we think a more effective SaaS content strategy should prioritize middle and bottom of the funnel topics to capture people who are already actively searching for a solution to their problem.
 bottom-of-funnel-content-marketing 

How This Concept Would Be Applied to Our Business
Let us venture outside of SaaS for a hot minute to share an example of this thinking that hits close to home.
We, Grow and Convert, have two products: a content marketing course for people who want to become really good at content marketing, and a content marketing agency for companies that just want to hire us to do content marketing for them.
At no point have we tried to rank for the term “content marketing,” despite that keyword having the highest search volume in our space.  content marketing Keyword search 
Why? Because who really searches for broad terms like that? Someone who has never heard of content marketing before? Someone researching the topic for a college paper? Ranking for that term would serve our business little direct value, because our best customers for either product already know what content marketing is and have very specific problems related to it. The only term from the image above that indicates someone would have a need for either product is content marketing agency.
If we ranked for any of the other keywords above, we’d have to collect emails (because very few, if any, of the readers of those topics will be ready to buy), nurture those people, and hope that at some point in the future, they’d be ready to buy. This is the way most people approach content marketing for SaaS companies.
What we do instead is identify pain points and topics that indicate someone is already looking for a solution, then we create content to rank for those terms and direct them to the main product-related call to action we’d like them to take (sign up for a free trial or demo). When you write bottom of funnel topics, you can go directly for the sale instead of pushing people to an email signup because the topic indicates someone has intent to buy your product vs. some of the broad topics that have no product intent.
Similarly for most SaaS companies, there are keywords and topics that indicate someone is looking for a solution such as your product. We think you should prioritize those topics and keywords first before ever focusing on the top of the funnel.
In this blog post, we’re going to back up the above argument with real client data. This is to (hopefully) convince you that SaaS companies should focus on bottom of the funnel content first and work their way up the funnel later — as opposed to how most companies do things, which is the other way around. Then we’re going to introduce you to our Pain Point SEO process to help you identify these high-converting keywords, we’ll share our process of how to discover them, and then we’ll show some examples of companies using this process to get results quickly from content marketing.
As a reminder, we teach this process in detail by applying it to various companies (including SaaS) in our content marketing course. Our course is also built into a community, so people ask questions, start discussions, and share their work in the lesson pages themselves, and we and other members give feedback. We also get on live Zoom calls about once a month and dissect members’ actual content strategies and brainstorm ideas on how we’d form content strategies for their businesses. You can learn more and join here. 
Top of the Funnel Content: Why It Has Minuscule Business Value (Compared to Bottom of Funnel Pieces)
To further illustrate the point above, let’s look at an example of a real SaaS company and what they rank for.
Pipedrive is a SaaS product that positions themselves as a Sales CRM and Pipeline Management software. (We have no business relationship with them, they were just a well known SaaS company that came to mind for this example.)
If we look at some of their top rankings in Ahrefs, they rank #1 for terms such as “sales tactics,” “sales presentation,” “challenger sales model,” and “sales meeting agenda.” pipedrive keywords top of the funnel 
Now you may be thinking, “That’s great! They rank for a ton of these sales-related terms, and they sell to salespeople. This will bring in the right customers.”
But the problem is those topics have nothing to do with their product — which is a sales CRM that helps with pipeline management.
If someone comes to their blog to read an article on “sales presentations,” what does that topic have to do with a CRM? Does the fact that someone Googled that term indicate they have a need for a CRM?
Nope.
It’s a massive leap for someone to read an article on sales presentations while on a CRM website and then think to themselves, “You know what, I’m actually in the market for a new CRM software; let me sign up.” You’re relying on chance: The article is about sales, so maybe by chance some people reading it will also need a CRM right now. The topic of the article itself is doing you no favors in helping find or filter people who do need a CRM right now.
What’s worse is that Pipedrive doesn’t rank for many of the keywords that do indicate that someone would be looking for a solution like theirs.
For example, they don’t rank for the terms “salesforce alternatives,” “pipedrive alternatives,” “automatic call logging” (a feature they highlight in the video on their homepage), “call logging software,” and a ton more high-intent keywords.
Their competitors do rank for these terms though. So Pipedrive is missing out on the opportunity to capture business from prospects who are literally looking for the exact use cases their product solves or alternatives to their competitors.
 call logging software google query 

Pipedrive is even bidding on many of these keywords in Google Ads, which indicates to us that these keywords likely do drive business for them — yet they’ve chosen to prioritize top of the funnel keywords over topics that indicate someone is searching for their product. salesforce alternatives google search 
We should note we mean no harm to Pipedrive, and this problem is not unique to them. It’s ubiquitous in SaaS, which is why we’re discussing it in this depth.
But Doesn’t Top of the Funnel Content Still Have Long-Term Benefits, Even if You Can’t Measure It?
Now, some arguments we typically get for going after these top of the funnel terms and keywords are: “These types of articles are great thought leadership,” or “You can’t measure the impact of someone reading one of those articles and telling their colleagues about it.” Therefore, “We know they work; you just can’t measure it.”
Well, I have two counterpoints to that.
First, most of the articles written on these top of funnel terms are what we like to call “Google research papers.” They’re farmed out to freelance writers that have little to no direct experience on the topic, and those writers Google around on the topic, jot down what others say, and largely regurgitate the same information in different words. The pieces technically cover the topic, but they have no originality. They’re not provocative. They take no interesting or unique stance.
Take Pipedrive’s #1 ranking for “sales presentation,” which we showed above. Let’s look at the table of contents of the article:
 sales presentations pipedrive 

Remember: Who is the decision maker in a sales-driven organization on which CRM to use? Experienced sales executives. Is teaching them what a sales presentation is “thought leadership”? Or look at the third bullet point: “What to bring to your sales presentation.” Do experienced sales teams not know that?
When we look inside these sections, they just cover extremely basic information, such as mentioning that most sales presentations include a sales deck.
 sales presentation blog post 

This is not thought leadership. Yet SaaS company after SaaS company produces articles like this and expect it to drive business.
Second, you can measure whether people who read top of the funnel content eventually convert later (even if they close the browser, or convert weeks or months later)! Most content agencies or marketers don’t do this, but we do it religiously (and have written about it in detail here).
So there is no need to hand wave and say, “It’s generating business, I swear; you just can’t see it.” The measurement isn’t perfect, and you can’t measure every single lead that comes from content, but it gives you a lower-limit estimate of the actual amount and is a great indicator as to what topics drive a majority of the volume.
We can look and see how much business top of funnel content generates versus bottom.
For example, the chart below shows the difference in conversion rates between top of funnel articles and what we call “pain point SEO” topics, our term for topics that indicate buying intent (aka mid or bottom of funnel). The highlighted articles are pain point SEO topics, and the unhighlighted ones are top of funnel topics that have no product buying intent but are loosely on the topic of this company’s industry (like “sales stuff” for Pipedrive above). Look at the difference in the conversion rates.
 conversion focused SEO driven content 
Note: The same thing is true with first click attribution, but the model comparison tool reports don’t show traffic, so we used this to make a point
If what we can measure on the conversion side shows such a massive difference in product conversion rates between top of funnel and mid or bottom of the funnel topics, what makes you think the unhighlighted articles would magically result in a huge amount of conversions from people being impressed by your content and sharing it with others?
Now, let us be clear: We’re not saying the top of the funnel has absolutely no place in marketing. We are making an argument about priority in content marketing: Why would you produce top of funnel content that doesn’t have product intent prior to owning all of the keywords and terms that do have product-buying intent?
We believe in a “bottom-up” approach to the funnel: Focus on direct product-related and Pain Point SEO terms first, and work your way up the funnel to terms that have less buying intent.
 pain point SEO funnel 

Taking this approach, you’ll get results much faster than you would if you were taking the top-down approach.
The Spectrum of SaaS Companies: How Much Bottom of the Funnel Is There?
Now, a common question we get at this point is, “Okay, yeah; that makes sense, but what happens if there aren’t a ton of these buying-intent keywords for my product?”
Related objections are “We’re reinventing the way people do things in our industry,” or “We have some new technology that doesn’t exist,” or “We’re trying to create our own category, and as a result, there aren’t bottom of the funnel, buying-intent keywords for us, such as ‘sales crm software’ for Pipedrive.”
These can be legitimate concerns (but for most companies, the “inventing a category” objection is overblown, as we’ll argue in a second). The key is to remember that our bottom of funnel first strategy is about prioritization. Even if your product doesn’t have a ton of bottom of the funnel keywords, you should still go after them first. There’s no excuse not to.
But from a pure search-opportunity perspective, how limited are these high conversion intent keywords? Well, companies fall on a spectrum on this issue. Let’s share the two extremes first, and then we’ll meet in the middle.
 spectrum of content funnel 

“Lots of Competition” End of the Spectrum: You’re in a known category, and you have a known solution (i.e., the Pipedrive CRM example above). CRMs have been around for a long time, and everyone in sales knows what they are. Here you have plenty of bottom of the funnel terms, and you can (and should) spend a long time knocking them out before moving to top of the funnel topics.
Now, we sometimes get pushback from companies that we chat with who say, “Well, my product is different. We have an AI to automatically add contacts to a CRM … ” (or something to that effect). They think just because they have some competitive technology advantage or they position themselves differently that they need some unique approach.
This isn’t true.
Your customers would still search for a CRM or specific use cases that a CRM solves for from a search perspective. The body of the content should highlight the differentiators, and so should your trial and demo — but this doesn’t change the content strategy, specifically topic prioritization.
For more on finding these opportunities, read our post on Pain Point SEO, or join our course and community where we share our strategy and process to do this through written and video case studies (we’ll also answer questions specific to your business).
“Brand New Category” End of the Spectrum: You’re truly creating a new category. This is extremely rare in our opinion. In this case, creating top of the funnel to educate people on your category, why it’s important, and why they should invest in it, makes a ton of sense. But — and this is a big “but” — these companies come around once in many years.
An example of this would be Coinbase when they first started. Most people barely knew about cryptocurrency or Bitcoin then, so there wasn’t a ton of search volume, nor alternative products that they were competing with. It was an entirely new technology then, so people needed to be educated on the topic.
Other examples would be: You were truly the first CRM, you were the first marketing automation software, or you were Uber inventing ridesharing or Airbnb popularizing the sharing economy when it came to rentals.
Again, we want to emphasize: These examples are really rare. To be in this category, you can’t just be inventing a new thing. You have to be inventing a new category, meaning you are inventing a new thing and aren’t replacing an existing behavior or solution that people search for online; you are truly creating a new behavior.
Lots of SaaS founders and marketers think they’re here, but they’re not. Even Airbnb, if they had started with an SEO-based strategy, could have ranked for hotel-related terms, or Uber could have done the same with taxi-related terms.
For most companies, you’re likely somewhere in the middle. You might be in a category with a few other players, you likely have some technological or unique way of doing things that differentiates you, and in this case, there are likely some bottom of the funnel terms you can go after that indicate the customer is literally looking for your solution right now (such as the “salesforce alternative” we mentioned earlier). But there are also tons of mid-funnel terms that have high conversion intent that you can rank for. This is the pain point SEO sweet spot. In order to do this, you need to find the pain points your target audience has and then pair those with SEO keywords. Let’s discuss how to do that next.
SaaS Content Marketing:How to Identify “Pain Point SEO” Keywords That Your Best Customers Are Actually Searching For
Identifying keywords that have high conversion intent starts with knowing what the top pain points are that lead your customers to purchase.
When you know what your customer pain points are, you can back into what keywords are more likely than others to drive conversions. We call this process of identifying these keywords pain point SEO. These pain points are specific, not general. (To go back to the Pipedrive example, think, “Getting more of my sales reps to update the CRM” rather than “sales tips.”)
The more specific, the more the topic itself will filter for people who are like your best customers and have the exact pain points your product solves for and thus are likely to convert.
Step 1: It All Starts With Customer Research
We want to figure out two things here: who are their best customers, and what are their pain points.
This article on our site will share our process for conducting customer research to figure who your best customers are and what their pain points are.
Step 2: Building A Bottom-up Content Strategy off of Your Customer Research
After you’ve identified who your best customers are and what pain points they have, then you’ll use that information to back into what keywords and topics to target to drive conversions quickly.
There are two posts on our site that go into more depth on how to do this:
            * Pain Point SEO: How to Produce SEO Content That Drives Conversions
            * Content Ideation: Ways to Come up with Content Ideas That Convert
In our course, we go further and literally do this process for four different real companies, including SaaS; we interview their founding team, ask our customer research questions, and then come up with pain point SEO ideas in a spreadsheet, which we share. We breakdown all of this in detailed screencasts to show what we’re doing and why.
 grow and convert members course 

Examples of SaaS Companies We’ve Grown Using This Content Strategy
As with every article on our site, we don’t like to say this is a process or strategy you should follow without backing it up with data and case studies.
So we thought we’d share a few different SaaS companies that we were able to grow using the strategy outlined in this post.
How We Scaled Leadfeeder’s Signups to Over 200/month
As we explain in the full article, in the beginning of working with the SaaS company Leadfeeder on their content marketing strategy, we hadn’t developed this approach yet.
Back then, like everyone else, we also believed that top of funnel stories and topics would be what drove growth for the company. However, after looking through what was converting and trying to analyze why certain posts converted at a much higher percentage than others, we stumbled into this learning: The thing that affects conversion rate the most is the topic of the blog post, and bottom of funnel posts were converting way higher than the rest.
Once we shifted our entire content strategy toward pain point SEO and stopped going after top of funnel stories and topics, both traffic and conversions started to scale quickly.
 pasted image 0 1 1 

For the full Leadfeeder case study, click here.
A Client Already Ranking for High-Volume Keywords
Next, here is the landing pages report of another SaaS client that had a solid content marketing operation already in place before we started working with them and thus were already ranking for some high-volume keywords in their space.
The top post, above, in this three-month time span ranks for some high-volume keywords and generates way more traffic than any other post: 21,000 sessions. It also generated a non-trivial amount of account creations: 12%, or seven out of 55. That’s because it’s mid funnel: It’s a “tools” keyword in their space — think “sales tools” in the Pipedrive example at the beginning. (This report is last click only. We’ll look at first click below in a second. Spoiler alert: The conclusion is the same.)
Now look at post #4. This is one, we produced for them. It brought in 1,900 sessions, only 9% of the traffic of the top post they already made themselves. Useless, right? Content marketers that focus on traffic as the key metric would think so, but it generated more last-click signups than any other blog post on their site in these three months. The conversion rate was a whopping 0.52%, when the entire blog was converting at only 0.08%.
We can also look at first-click conversions via Google Analytics model comparison tool to see if the story changes. Note that the difference between last click and first click, as explained in this article, is that first-click conversions count anyone who landed on one of these blog posts and later, within 90 days, came back and converted. Last click only counts conversions that happen in the same session.
 model comparison tool content marketing 

(I’ve shown the last two characters of the URLs in both screenshots so you can see which post is which. Post #1 from the top screenshot is post #1 here too.)
In first-click conversions, the high traffic post has more (in fact, double) the conversions: 14 first click. Our post (#4 in the top screenshot) has 11 first-click conversions.
But the conversion rate difference is still astounding. The high traffic post converts at 0.07%, while our bottom of funnel post converts at 0.57%.
It’s even more impactful to see this as a graph:
 conversion rate top of the funnel and bottom of the funnel blog posts 

This is the power of bottom of funnel pieces. They can generate the same conversions with way less traffic because their conversion rate is so much higher than everything else.
Take a final look at the top screenshot of this section, and see how the vast majority of blog posts generate almost no business. This is not an anomaly; this is status quo for almost all SaaS companies. In fact, for most SaaS companies, it’s worse: They have the non-converting blog posts without any of the high-converting ones.
A New Client Getting Conversions From Pain Point SEO Before Even Ranking in Google
As a final example, let’s look at the power of pain point SEO to generate quick results in the early stages of content marketing. This is a new client who we’ve only been working with for 4 months.
Like the previous client, they also have a strong in-house content team that has produced a ton of content, many of which generate conversions.
The two highlighted pieces in this landing page report are one of our early pieces; that is, mid-funnel Pain Point SEO. In other words, it’s not a topic where the reader is looking for the software (e.g., “salesforce alternative” for Pipedrive) but is a mid-funnel pain point that we knew from our customer research their best customers cared about, so conversion intent was still high.
It has generated eight conversions in this timespan (split over two URLs due to ad UTMs), all of which came from paid Facebook promotion of this piece:
 model comparison tool facebook conversions 

That is the same number of conversions as the highest-converting piece on their blog (#1 above). But we’re generating those conversions before the piece even ranks for its intended keyword, strictly from paid social media channels, and by generating only 600 sessions. Note that 600 sessions is not expensive to buy from Facebook — we typically see click costs of $.30 to $.75 for this company.


This highlights the power of finding the right high-converting topics. They can generate conversions without waiting weeks or months to move up Google’s rankings.




Link building
One of the most poorly understood elements of all SEO is link building. Nevertheless, building links remains a critical part of SEO success—especially in competitive markets. These resources cover both a high-level overview of successful link building strategies and a detailed breakdown of the execution.
10. 5 Proven Linkbuilding Strategies for SaaS
Links to blog posts or long-form resources increase their search visibility and build awareness. They also help sites rank for bottom-of-funnel terms—a rising tide lifts all boats.
Some content marketers have it “easy,” working in highly visual industries (e.g. food, fashion) with wide appeal. That simplifies content creation and link building compared to, say, trying to promote niche B2B software.
Given the potential benefits and challenges in SaaS, who’s doing it well? To find out, I ran a study to benchmark content marketing performance for 500 SaaS companies.
While the initial research covered many elements—and focused mostly on numbers—this article reveals the strategies that led to successful SaaS link building.
Table of contents
            * Data and methodology
            * 5 ways that SaaS content earns links
            * 1. Become a point of reference.
            * 2. Share others’ research.
            * 3. Make the news—for better or worse.
            * 4. Go bigger or better.
            * 5. Choose high-volume topics—and be patient. 
            * Conclusion
Data and methodology
My initial research found that, on average, the top-performing articles by major SaaS companies generated backlinks from just 9 referring domains.
In this post, I focus on a subset of that data—55 articles that significantly outperformed the rest of the field. These articles generated three times the average number of backlinks (at least 27 referring domains).
I also filtered posts to include only those that contributed at least 5% of the total links to the site for pages other than the homepage.
            * This filtering helps control for site size—a post on NYTimes.com that earns 100 links isn’t noteworthy, whereas one on a personal blog that earns 20 may be exceptional.
            * Excluding the homepage is a quick way to remove a major, non-content outlier that would otherwise skew the total link count.
By assessing the strategies behind those 55 articles, I’ve identified five shared features. If you’re creating content for your SaaS company, these are the themes and practical ideas to add to your content calendar.
5 ways that SaaS content earns links
1. Become a point of reference.
Eight of the articles in this list (15%) are original research. There’s a mix of infographics and in-depth studies, all of which generate lots of inbound links.
According to a 2017 study, research is the most efficient type of content for earning backlinks. A 2018 study found that 74% of marketers who conducted original research saw increased website traffic as a result (though only 49% reported generating backlinks).
Example 1
“What the Most Common Passwords of 2016 List Reveals [Research Study]” by Keeper
WORD COUNT
	BACKLINKS
	REFERRING DOMAINS
	DATE OF PUBLICATION
	483
	3,100
	815 (39% of all RDs)
	2017
	 
 original research on passwords. 

This hybrid blog post and infographic presents the results of Keeper’s study that assessed the most common passwords in 2016. (They sourced their data from recent data breaches.) The post now accounts for 39% of all referring domains to pages other than the homepage.
Why did it succeed?
            * Smartly sourced, hard-to-find data. Passwords, of course, are usually private. The study reveals rarely unearthed data that people are naturally curious about. Using data from a data breach as a source was also a clever way to conduct research quickly and cheaply.
            * Ranked answers. Humans love rankings. A random list of “common passwords” wouldn’t have had the same impact as the rank-order version. Does it matter which is fourth versus sixth? Nope. But it’s a more engaging way to frame the content. 
What could they have done better?
            * The visual presentation isn’t impressive. The main report is a clickable link to a PDF, which doesn’t make much sense. For one, many links and visits may go to the PDF version (rather than the HTML version, which includes more company info, navigation, calls to action, etc.). Second, a PNG would’ve made the pseudo-infographic embeddable on other sites to help earn even more links and referral traffic.
            * There’s no segmentation of data. In all likelihood, the data breach contained more than just passwords—it probably contained emails and, perhaps, addresses, too. Additional variables would enable additional reports (i.e. more pages to link to) or more targeted versions to increase the content’s appeal (e.g. “What are the most common passwords in Canada?”).
Example 2
“New Study: 2018 PROMO Online Video Statistics and Trends” by PROMO
WORD COUNT
	BACKLINKS
	REFERRING DOMAINS
	DATE OF PUBLICATION
	1,792
	263
	75 (10% of all RDs)
	2018
	 highly linked original research on video viewing habits. 

This is another example of a hybrid blog post and infographic. It presents the results of PROMO’s study looking at the video habits of 500 people across all age ranges, and the post now accounts for 10% of all referring domains to pages other than the homepage.
Why did it succeed?
            * Visuals for each statistic. In addition to the large infographic at the start of the article, PROMO created visuals for each statistic that can easily be embedded on other sites. This means there’s three different ways to link to this article: quoting statistics; embedding the infographic; and embedding images for certain statistics.
            * Video is a hot topic. For marketers, video is having its moment. This Google Trends chart shows how searches for video marketing have increased over the past five years, and the arrow indicates when this article was published—right before peak interest.
 google trends chart for interest in video marketing. 

What could they have done better?
            * There’s no segmentation of data. This article looked at video viewing habits of people globally, from teenagers to seniors. Breaking down this data into smaller subsets might reveal additional insights (e.g. how video habits vary by age, gender, or region).
            * No extra statistics. All of the stats in the article are covered in the infographic, which is shown at the start of the post. While the article goes into more detail about each statistic, everything’s been covered before you get to the bulk of the copy. For users, there’s little motivation to spend time reading the article.
Takeaway: You can scale your research project to your budget.
The research studies I looked at varied in scope: PROMO assessed 500 people’s video habits; Keeper analysed 10 million passwords. As another example, Gong used AI to analyse 519,000 discovery calls to understand what drives success. All of these projects generated backlinks.
You don’t need an expansive study to generate links. Even small studies can build credibility for your company as an authoritative source on a topic.
The main drawback of research studies? They age. Over time, statistics become less relevant; the links you earn in 2019 could go to another, more recent study in 2020. If you invest in original research, consider a topic that:
            * Has enduring interest;
            * Is feasible to update annually.
2. Share others’ research.
An additional seven articles (13%) share other people’s research as infographics, statistical roundups, or text commentary.
You might assume that most people would link directly to the original research, but this shows that, for the purpose of earning links, aggregating research from multiple sources may be just as effective as doing your own.
Example 1
“22 Mind-Blowing Mobile Payment Statistics” by BlueSnap
WORD COUNT
	BACKLINKS
	REFERRING DOMAINS
	DATE OF PUBLICATION
	904
	52
	35 (7% of all RDs)
	2017
	 collection of original research studies on mobile payments. 

This article collates 22 statistics about mobile payments from 13 sources, covering security, users, market share, and global statistics. It accounts for 7% of all referring domains pointing to pages other than the homepage.
Why did it succeed?
            * Built credibility by referencing multiple studies. By bringing together relevant statistics from a number of sites, BlueSnap delivered a more credible resource—you don’t need to scour the web to find out if a single research study is corroborated (or debunked) by other studies. 
            * Took advantage of human laziness. If you’re writing about this topic, it’s much easier to link straight to this list three or four times than click through to each original source. For example, articles by ConversionFanatics and Fourth Source both reference statistics collated by BlueSnap, linking to this article instead of the original sources.
What could they have done better?
            * Visual presentation is uninspiring. This article is all text. There are no visual elements to add interest. Illustrating statistics would make them more shareable and be an additional incentive to link to their article instead of the original sources.
Example 2
“10 Year-End Giving Statistics Every Fundraiser Should Know” by Neon
WORD COUNT
	BACKLINKS
	REFERRING DOMAINS
	DATE OF PUBLICATION
	798
	196
	111 (17% of all RDs)
	2016
	 example of highly linked post on donation statistics. 

Similar to the article above, this one collates 10 statistics about year-end donations from various sources. It accounts for 17% of all referring domains aside from the homepage.
Why did it succeed?
            * Visuals for each statistic. With a custom image for each statistic, this article looks more like a piece of original research than a list of stats. These visuals can be embedded on other sites, providing another way of linking to this article beyond simple text.
            * Looks like the original source. Many websites cite Neon not just with a link but in the anchor text as well. Some go so far as to credit Neon (erroneously) as the source of the research:
 example of link to aggregator of statistics, not original source. 

What could they have done better?
            * More data. Ten statistics is a good starting point—it delivered lots of links for Neon, but it’s still a small number, and the data is growing older by the minute. (It was originally published in 2016.) Updated, expanded statistics could justify another round of promotion and keep the post current.
Takeaway: No research? No problem.
If you don’t have the resources to conduct original research, aggregating a list of reputable industry statistics might be the next best thing. You can reap all the benefits of original research—without actually doing any.
Statistical roundups are valued resources that build credibility, sometimes at the expense of those who ran the original research studies.
3. Make the news—for better or worse.
My SaaS content marketing study found that PR-style content received twice as much organic traffic as blogs that focused on educational content. That statistic won’t hold true for mom-and-pop shops. But it does work for big companies whose fortunes qualify as newsworthy events.
Some events that earned links were intentional—acquisitions and funding announcements, for example. Others, like security incidents, were less desirable but nonetheless impactful.
Example 1
“Salesforce Signs Definitive Agreement to Acquire Datorama” by Datorama
WORD COUNT
	BACKLINKS
	REFERRING DOMAINS
	DATE OF PUBLICATION
	272
	89
	51 (21% of all RDs)
	2018
	A couple of acquisitions showed up in this data set, attracting coverage in tech press and the wider business press. For example, this article is Datorama’s announcement of their acquisition by Salesforce, and it accounts for 21% of referring domains to their site.
Why did it succeed?
            * Big name acquirer. With Salesforce as your acquirer, it automatically becomes big news in the world of sales and marketing, at least for a while. It helped that Salesforce linked to Datorama’s page in their article announcing the deal, bringing this piece to the attention of their wider audience.
            * Direct message from the CEO. Make no mistake: This “article” is a press release. But it’s authored and signed by Ran Sarig, Datorama CEO and co-founder, which makes it more interesting and engaging than a dry, anonymous press release. It almost comes off as an “opinion” piece, embedding the CEO’s take on the acquisition within the page and, thus, turning it into a source for journalists reporting on the acquisition.
What could they have done better?
            * Logos! This is another all-text article, with no featured image in the post or header. A visual that featured both the Datorama and Salesforce logos could have provided a visual way of communicating the acquisition—ideal for sharing on social media or earning image links.
Example 2
“May 31, 2017 Security Incident (UPDATED June 8, 2017)” by OneLogin
WORD COUNT
	BACKLINKS
	REFERRING DOMAINS
	DATE OF PUBLICATION
	646
	941
	395 (36% of all RDs)
	2017
	“There’s no such thing as bad press.” Probably not. But, as far as earning links go, maybe so.
This article details a major security incident, covering the scale of the incident and the impact on customers and their data. This was big news and widely linked to—it accounts for more than one third (36%) of all referring domains, other than those pointing to the homepage.
Even if OneLogin wished they didn’t have to publish such an article, doing so gave them some control over the narrative—and earned plenty of links. (It was a good day for their SEO team, at least.) 
Why did it “succeed”?
            * It was national news. This incident made it onto the BBC website. For many companies, a data breach (hopefully) won’t make it into national news.
            * Ongoing updates kept it relevant. This security incident was reported on May 31, 2017, with updates shared on June 1 and finally on June 8. This meant affected customers (and news outlets) had one page to refer to for up-to-date information, as the incident was resolved.
What could they have done better?
            * Customize the design of the page. The audience for this page is unique—customers and news readers concerned about the incident. If they wanted to make the most of a bad situation, they could’ve devoted more page space and copy to talking about the company (in a positive light) and offered a more relevant call to action than “Sign up to receive a newsletter.” 
Takeaway: Self-promotional content can work.
Not all links come from educational content. It’s okay to write about your company, and a self-promotional focus can bring in tons of links if your company qualifies as newsworthy—or is acquired or connected to someone who is.
It’s tough to argue that “bad news” is an opportunity. But it does earn links. Quite often, those links come from powerful news outlets.
Whether the news is good (funding, acquisitions) or bad (data breach), here are 10 sites with decent domain ratings (60+) that linked back to articles in this subcategory:
            * B&T Magazine
            * Ad Exchanger
            * CIO Dive
            * CMSWire
            * Diginomica
            * MarTech Series
            * Mobile Marketing
            * The Drum
            * TechCrunch
            * CFO.com
Put these sites on your outreach list if you’re making news.
4. Go bigger or better.
The skyscraper technique is a popular strategy for building links. You find popular content about an important (read: high-volume) subject and create a better version.
There are four key ways to improve upon existing content:
            1. Length. If someone shares a list of 20 must-use tools, make a list of 25.
            2. Newness. Has someone published a roundup of top tips for 2018? Update it for 2019.
            3. Design. Is great information languishing on an ugly blog? Share the same information with stronger visuals or make the post easier to skim/navigate, especially on mobile.
            4. Depth. Go into more detail than the original post—turn a brief paragraph into a full section, substantiate claims with expert opinions or stats, etc.
The examples below focus on two methods: length and depth.
Example 1
“100+ Best Software Testing Tools Reviewed (Research Done for You!)” by QA Symphony
WORD COUNT
	BACKLINKS
	REFERRING DOMAINS
	DATE OF PUBLICATION
	14,295
	570
	80 (14% of all RDs)
	2016
	This article is a great example of how to generate backlinks with a longer article. Totaling over 14,000 words, QA Symphony collates a list of more than 100 software testing tools. It accounts for 14% of all referring domains to their site.
Why did it succeed?
            * Clear, valuable comprehensiveness. This article is by far the most comprehensive list on the first three pages of search results for “best software testing tools.” It covers 100+ tools—more than twice as many as the next-longest list. Longer doesn’t always mean better, but it works for this topic.
What could they have done better?
            * Keep it updated. This article occupies the third organic spot for “best software testing tools.” Since its 2016 publication, it’s been beaten out by two newer (or at least more recently updated) articles—both of which reference 2019 in their page titles. Updating the title and adding a few new tools could push it to the top of the rankings and generate even more links.
 example of comprehensive resource being outranked by more recent but lesser versions. 

Example 2
“What Is Account-Based Marketing? An ABM Definition” by Terminus
WORD COUNT
	BACKLINKS
	REFERRING DOMAINS
	DATE OF PUBLICATION
	1213
	247
	79 (25% of all RDs)
	2016
	This article from Terminus was published in November 2016 and has generated 247 backlinks from 79 referring domains. Even though it’s a few years old, it still ranks on the first page of Google for “what is abm.”
Why did it succeed?
            * Subheadings with related keywords. The subheadings in this article all contain other relevant keywords, helping this piece rank for lots of ABM-related searches, as well as making it easier for readers to scan and navigate. That pleases users and earns more “passive” links—citations that accumulate gradually from top rankings, not outreach. 
            * More in-depth than similar articles. I looked at other articles ranking for the same search term that were published between 2014 and 2016. For example, this article by Salesforce is shorter than the Terminus article (762 words vs. 1,213) and focuses almost entirely on what you do in account-based marketing, rather than how and why you’d do it. 
What could they have done better?
            * Keep it updated. One of the newer articles out-ranking the Terminus post is this article by HubSpot. Published in 2019, it also goes more in-depth, covering the same ground while adding a closing section that includes steps to launch an ABM campaign. 
Takeaway: The skyscraper technique works—if you have a plan.
If you’re looking to “steal” links from existing content, it’s not enough simply to create a post that’s longer/newer/better. To generate links for your new content, you need to invest time and effort in the outreach. To quote Ahrefs:
The key to successful execution of the Skyscraper Technique is email outreach. But instead of spamming every blogger you know, you reach out to those who have already linked to the specific content you improved upon. The idea is this: since they’ve already linked to a similar article, they are more likely to link to one that is better.
Something else to keep in mind: The initial bump you might get from outdoing others will only continue if you keep your content up to date. If you choose a topic (like software tools) that requires annual updates to maintain user interest and organic rankings, make sure your strategy includes time to keep the content fresh.
5. Choose high-volume topics—and be patient. 
This last option is a blend of easy (“do your keyword research”) and hard (“win buy-in for a years-long strategy”).
Keyword research ensures that your posts have a chance to earn passive links. Once your post rises to the top of search results, it becomes the easiest source for others’ to grab as they write their articles. However, that strategy works only if your stakeholders buy into the “long play.”
Among the 55 articles that made the cut for this article, the majority were published in 2017 and 2018:
 chart showing the publish date of posts that earned the most links. 

With more than half the articles between 1 and 2 years old, the data suggests that it takes time for articles to rank well in search, be recognised as a reputable source, and earn backlinks. (At the same time, the link opportunities may diminish after a couple years as content decays.)
This was especially true for original research. For example, in July 2017, Gong published “The 7 Best Discovery Call Tips For Sales You’ll Ever Read.” But it wasn’t until 2019 that it was referenced in HubSpot’s Sales Statistics roundup. Will your higher-ups wait two years for a payoff?
Conclusion
My research found a strong correlation between the number of referring domains and the amount of organic traffic an article receives:
 scatterplot showing the correlation between links and organic ranking for saas content marketing. 

If you’re trying to increase organic acquisition—to content or bottom-of-funnel sales pages—links are a vital component of that effort.
If you’re trying to generate links with your SaaS content marketing, the biggest takeaway I can share is this: Not one of the 55 articles on this list are run-of-the-mill 500-word blog posts. All required more editorial resources for research, design, and/or writing. Further, all require ongoing editorial support to maintain and expand upon their initial success.
Nonetheless, as a starting point, focus on these five strategies:
            1. Become a reference point.
            2. Share others’ research.
            3. Make the news—for better or worse.
            4. Go bigger or better.
            5. Choose high-volume topics—and be patient.




11. Linkbuilding for SaaS Companies
Whether you are a new or established SaaS company, you are probably already creating a ton of amazing, jaw-dropping content.
I’m guessing your blog is filled with articles like:
The ultimate guide to X and Y, the top X tools, how to do X, the top X statistics for 2022, etc.
Everyone talks about creating great content and how this will land you amazing backlinks naturally with time, right?
After working with SaaS companies for the past 2 years though, I’ve noticed a pattern…
Backlinks for SaaS companies very rarely come naturally. Especially cause everybody and their mom are starting a SaaS company in 2022.
No matter the niche, you are most likely going to have to manually build backlinks to your SaaS company to get your amazing content seen and consumed to eventually acquire new customers.
In this article, I won’t talk about specific techniques or tactics (plenty of that already online).
What I will do is give you the general frameworks that we at Growth Gorilla use to find link opportunities and ideas for SaaS companies based on what your target pages are.
let’s get to it 🙂
Unique challenges for B2B SaaS companies
  

Before we even get started with the juicy stuff (I know you’re looking for that secret sauce), I’d like to talk about a few things.
SaaS companies have to face a few pretty unique challenges which might make the link building process a bit more difficult.
1) Let’s be honest, most SaaS look the same.
It’s become very hard for software companies to differentiate themselves from the competition.
The first questions I ask new clients are:
            * What’s your USP (unique selling proposition) against your competitors?
            * What should make someone pick your product and not someone else’s?
If they can’t answer these, they are usually not a good fit for us.
The first rule to stand out in link building is to have something unique to offer. If you don’t have it, you shouldn’t even be in business.
2) Bro, that’s SUPER niche
A lot of SaaS companies, on the other hand, have a very unique offering. Too unique.
These are companies where it’s pretty evident that the product-market fit has not been achieved yet.
If this is you, don’t waste your time trying out link building, chances are the pool of possible prospects would be too narrow and you won’t have enough people to even send emails to let alone get links.
3) Where’s the blog?
The last issue with a lot of companies I’ve seen is the lack of informational content and of a solid content marketing plan and strategy.
They would come to me asking for link building help with just a few pages like:
            * “Use cases” pages
            * “Feature” pages
            * “Alternative” pages
Those are all great middle of the funnel and bottom of the funnel pages and you definitely need them.
The problem is that nobody wants to link to them.
While it is possible to build some links to those pages (and we’ll take a look at those later on), In order to do link building at a bigger scale, you really need to have some top of the funnel, informational content.
And it MUST be amazing.
4) Booooring.
Some SaaS products are just plain boring.
This is where you need to shine as a content marketer and come up with something very creative and unique to get through the noise.
Write great content
  

With those out of the way, it’s time to talk about the main principle and probably the most over-utilized advice out there.
Create great content.
What does this even mean?
In theory, great content is:
            * Original
            * Actionable
            * Shareable
            * Readable
            * Quotable
            * Memorable
            * Visually appealing
That’s all and nothing, I know right?
Honestly, the best way to create great content is to see what’s already ranking for your keyword and produce something better and/or different on all those fronts.
If you can’t do this, it’s gonna be hard to compete.
That said, I think that most of the time as with everything in life, people will judge a book by its cover.
Let’s look at this example:
This is an article by Paul Graham:
  

This is an article by Podia:
  

Now,
Say we are in an alternate timeline and you don’t know who Paul Graham is…
Ask yourself:
Which article would you rather read first just by skimming those images?
I’m sorry but I’d pick the article from Podia, just by looking at it.
In reality, I’m perfectly aware of who Paul Graham is and I know his piece is stellar (and I’ve read it multiple times over), which gives him instant credibility even if, let’s be honest the design and readability aren’t the best.
This is a very simple check anyone can do to see if their content can compete at least visually.
Once you are on par with the visual aspect, then you must also make sure that your content is actually very good and useful.
Great looking content like this, makes people more willing to read it which in turn makes acquiring backlinks 10 times easier.
You won’t get a link back if someone doesn’t even want to read your content in the first place.
Link building strategies that work for SaaS
I originally wanted to write an article with the best strategies and techniques that SaaS companies can use to build backlinks (stuff like podcasting, guest posting, resource pages, broken links, unlinked mentions and so on) but when I stopped to think about it for a minute it hit me…
The internet is full of articles like that and most of all, those are all tactics that almost any kind of business can use, nothing makes them better or worse for SaaS companies.
I guess the problem is that people always try to look for that one secret technique that might make their life easier and magically save their business.
Yeah, it doesn’t exist.
So, instead of writing the same regurgitated list of link building techniques, I thought I would go over my own “Playbook” for building links specifically to SaaS companies.
This will be more of a strategic path and plan than exact techniques, although I will also include the general how-to for every step.
Our SaaS link building playbook – the only strategy you need
Step #0 – Identify what you have to work with
The first step in our process is identifying the kind of content that we have available to work with.
We usually split the content into these 4 buckets:
            1. Home page – brand, authority
            2. Linkable assets – infographics, research articles, ultimate guides (top of the funnel)
            3. Quick win pages – Usually blog articles that are on the verge of getting significant traffic, ranking at the bottom page 1, top page 2 (top of the funnel)
            4. Main landing pages (middle/bottom of the funnel – use cases, case studies, white papers, comparison or review pages)
Bucket 1 – Home Page
You’re probably wondering, well, the home page is usually the most naturally linked-to page, isn’t it?
Not necessarily.
Especially for newer companies who are facing tough competition, building backlinks to their home page is usually our first recommended step.
Why?
It’s quite easy (compared to other pages) and it helps build your overall authority as well as your brand reputation.
As a bonus, It could also bring in some referral traffic and the first few customers, win-win.
Bucket 2 – Linkable assets
These are any content asset that is created specifically to acquire backlinks. Think of infographics, industry related studies, and research articles, visual content, etc.
Content in this bucket is usually great to get some high-quality PR mentions and create relationships with bloggers on high authority websites.
You can essentially think of buckets 1 and 2 as your foundational backlinks. They will build your website’s authority and trust in the eyes of Google. Once you have enough of those, you can move over to the next 2 buckets (or if you have the resources, work on all of them at the same time).
Bucket 3 – Quick win pages
These pages are essentially the pages that your website is already ranking quite well for, but that with just a bit more effort could get a substantial boost and rank in the top 3 spots.
The best pages for this bucket are usually top or even middle of the funnel blog articles that are targeting very specific keywords.
They are your weapons to increase targeted traffic to educate your audience and spread your link profile to inner pages instead of just the home page.
If you have an established website with a ton of links to the home page already, this is usually the first bucket that we work with.
It’s also important to mention that these pages should be part of content hubs within your site and if possible, topically relevant to your main landing pages.
This way, the links you build to them will flow naturally throughout the entire hub helping all pages within it rank higher.
Bucket 4 – Main landing pages
These are your money pages. 
Middle and bottom of the funnel pages that serve as lead generation for your company.
Think about all your use cases, case studies, white papers, comparison, or review pages. Even free ebooks, templates, or research studies pages where you take people’s email addresses.
Building backlinks to these pages is obviously harder than all the other ones, but it can be done, and the ROI is way higher.
It’s essential for a good link building strategy to be able to work on all 4 content buckets and we have come up with specific strategies and approach for each of them.
Let’s take a look!
Step #1 – How to build links to your home page
Reverse engineering your competition using “patterns”
The first step in finding link building opportunities for your home page is to reverse engineer your competitors’ home page links.
Let’s say you are a direct competitor of Zoom, the video conferencing software (now it’s your time to shine!).
It’s as simple as going through Zoom’s backlinks in Ahrefs and looking for pages that are mentioning them.
These will most likely be “List” kind of articles.
To do that go to Ahrefs > Input your competitor’s home page URL > select “Exact URL”
  

Then, I like to select
            * “Group Similar” to show only unique backlinks or “One link per domain”.
            * “Dofollow” to only show the links that I’m interested in replicating
            * (Optional) English
Last step, and this might be the most important, is to add specific words or as I call them “patterns” within the title of the pages that are linking to your competitor.
Think about it this way…
If we are looking for “list” articles, what do most of them have within their titles?
            * Best
            * Top
            * Tools
            * Software
I call these “patterns” and we’ll use them to filter out the irrelevant results and only see what we need.
input those in the “include” search bar and only select “Titles of referring pages”. That’s because we’re only looking for those patterns to be contained in the title. Makes things simpler.
  

This will only show you the pages where the word is somewhere in the title.
  

Boom. The search for “Best” alone brought up 3,109 backlinks.
The next step is to do the same for all the other patterns. This will give you a ton of backlink opportunities to try and replicate for your business.
You can also try this to get “software X alternative” pages:
  

Once you have all of those, you can also run them through Screaming Frog to only get the ones that are not already linking out to you (you might get some of those in there depending on how established your company is).
Find the contact details and send your pitch explaining why your tool should make the list and what’s unique about it.
Most times you’ll have to send them a unique paragraph about your tool but that’s no biggie.
Job done!
Reverse engineering your niche using “seed topics”
The second step in finding link building opportunities for your home page is to reverse engineer your niche.
If you are a SaaS company, chances are your software solves one or more specific problems to people, or it’s useful in a few particular scenarios.
            * Maybe you are a project management tool to help freelancers work remotely?
            * Maybe you are a workflow software to help HR departments grow companies?
            * Maybe it’s a team productivity product to help managing remote workers?
Zoom even has some of those in their main title tag:
  

Whatever it is, someone has probably written a list article like “The X Best Y tools for Z“, right?
For Zoom, like we’ve seen before, it could be “The 6 best video conferencing apps for teams“
I call “Y” and “Z”, our “seed topics”.
You can just do a simple Google search for them:
  

(Here, I used -microsoft to remove all results related to Microsoft Teams)
What’s better, is that now you have a huge list of titles of pages that are linking out to your competitors from the first step we’ve covered.
Why not just extract all the different seed topics from those to find as many extra opportunities as you can?
You see…
if 1 page about Y is linking to your competitors, chances are that there are 10 or 100 other similar articles around the web which maybe are not even linking out to anybody!
Go get them!
This 2-step approach is our main strategy for home page links and all editorial links in general.
You’ll probably wonder, but what do I do once I completed the first campaign? What if I need more links to my home page?
The answer is simple, you can repeat the same exact campaigns 2/3 months later. What you’ll find is that in the meantime, other website will have published very similar articles containing your patterns and seed topics.
With time, the opportunities are virtually unlimited.
The main idea behind this kind of campaigns, is similar to the “Skyscraper Technique” in the sense that we will be reaching out to pitch our link placement because it’s better, unique, different etc…
What’s unique about our approach is that we don’t focus only on the pages that are linking to our competitors.
We want to maximize our efforts and find as many suitable pages as we possibly can.
Here’s the Skyscraper in a nutshell:
  

Here’s our approach:
  

Step #2 – How to build links to your linkable assets
This is pretty straightforward. Linkable assets are content pieces that are built from the ground up with the intent of attracting backlinks.
The best way to come up with ideas for these is as usual to reverse engineer what your competitors are doing.
Let’s say I have an email outreach platform or a lead generation platform. One of my main competitors will be Mailshake.
The first step is to go through their “Best by links” pages report in Ahrefs > only show 200 ok status pages then sort by pages with most referring domains.
Then go through the list starting from the top and look out for pages that seem linkable assets.
What does this mean?
            * ⛔️ No blog articles
            * ⛔️ No feature pages or other landing pages
            * ✅ Unique pages that have some of the classic linkable asset “footprints” within their URL or title.
Some of these footprints could be:
            * Statistics
            * FREE (training, ebook, etc.)
            * Infographic
You get the idea…
Here’s what I found on Mailshake’s report:
  

The first is a free online course on cold email:
  

The page is custom-designed, amazing to look at and most of all it looks like it gives a ton of value FOR FREE.
This is the perfect linkable asset if done well.
The second is an article with a ton of sales statistics:
  

Again, the overall design looks very good, readability is great and the statistics are divided into sub-sections to make it more digestible.
So you’re probably asking:
Well, there’s no way in hell I can compete with them now is there?
Actually, there is 🙂
You see…
The fact that they have created these resources, doesn’t mean you can’t create them as well.
The main caveat is the you should find your unique spin or angle to it!
A few examples:
Instead of a free course on cold email, why not create a free course on cold calling, lead qualification, lead nurturing or even sales strategy?
There are a ton of different but related topics you can use for this.
What’s important is that it should be aligned with your brand, with what your software does as well as with the sites you want to pitch it to.
What about the statistics article?
Last year, I was doing some research for a client to try and do this exact same thing. What i came up with was a slightly different variation on the same topic.
Example:
Instead of “sales statistics” we used “AI statistics for sales: how AI is impacting sales”.
We validated the idea with a simple google search:
  

From this you can see articles about AI statistics are getting quite a lot of links.
Our angle of making this specific for “AI statistics in sales” would just help make the piece stand out and be more relevant to the client.
The article was pretty successful and generated some very nice backlinks.
That’s basically it for linkable assets.
Obviously quality matters A LOT here. You are competing with some amazing pieces of content and most often than not, this will require some budget.
If you can come up with a good, unique angle and stand out from the pack though, you might as well be fine 🙂
I won’t go in-depth on how to find the sites to pitch this content to, but if you’re interested in learning more on that, I’d recommend this link prospecting guide by Giselle at Neomam.
Step #3 – How to build links to your “quick win” pages
What are “quick win pages” and how do I find them?
The concept of “quick win” pages is something I learned from Robbie Richards in his course “The SEO Playbook” (affiliate link) and it completely revolutionized how I think about approaching SEO.
The basic idea as I’ve mentioned in the intro, is to find those pages that are already being “liked” by Google which means they are ranking between the bottom of page one and the top of page 2 of the search results.
If these pages have made it there with minimum or sometimes no effort at all, what would happen if you can just build 10, 5 or even just 2 backlinks to them?
If you can do that and get into the top 5 or even top 3 rankings, that will be a very nice boost in traffic.
Now, it’s not so simple and it depends a lot on the competition.
The process that Robbie teaches goes like this:
            1. Establish your “keyword difficulty baseline” – the average keyword difficulty number of the pages where your site is ranking in the top 3 positions. This will give you a baseline for the difficulty that you know your site can compete with. (it uses Ahrefs keyword difficulty metric)
            2. Export all the keywords that your site is ranking for between positions 5 and 15 (these are your low-hanging fruits)
            3. Go through the list and decide which ones you can go after based on KD baseline (step 1) and how relevant it is for your business + your chances of competing.
Another important step is manually checking if your page can actually compete for that keyword, this means looking at the page types, number of referring domains and overall domain rating.
Our main goal was to adapt this process for link building.
To do this we want to find keywords that:
            * Have the potential to rank higher with minimum effort (new backlinks).
            * Are also linkable topics (i.e. there is a pool of people/prospects that are willing to link to this topic).
What I’ve found though, is that the lower the KD score in Ahrefs, the lower is the amount of backlinks to the top 10 results.
What does this mean for us?
It usually means that the specific keyword you are looking at, although being less competitive, is not very “linkable”.
You see…
Some topics lend themselves to be linked to or mentioned to better than others, it’s just how it is.
How do we overcome this?
First off, I’d only use keywords that have a KD of 5 at a bare minimum. This usually means there are some backlinks there.
The second step is to determine if you have the potential to rank higher for those keywords, is to check the SERP for them and look closely at the DR of the sites that are ranking.
If your site has a DR within +/- 5 DR pts of the competing assets in the top 5, you usually have a solid chance of moving it up, even if you’re starting from scratch.
Especially if your content is similar or better quality.
How do I find backlink opportunities for these pages?
Now that we have our shortlist of quick win keywords and their pages, it’s time to build some links to them.
This boils down to our “pattern + seed topic” method.
The difference now is that we don’t necessarily want to be looking at “list” articles only.
Our goal is to find all kinds of informational articles that might want to add a link to our page.
The “want to add a link” is the most important part.
This is why we mostly target blog articles for this method.
We are going to find seed topics and pair them with patterns to find pages where it makes sense for them to add our link.
This is basically pitching a link insertion.
The caveat here is that our page should:
            * Add unique or new insights to the other page
            * Correct some wrong data on the other page.
            * Complement the other page with something that was missing.
If we can do this, we have a good chance of getting a link. If not, we might still get a link IF we have something in return to offer to the other person (more on this later).
The first step in this process is to find the patterns.
The main patterns to find informational articles are the following:
            * how to
            * guide
            * what
            * why
            * when
            * where
            * resources
This means we want to find pages that have those patterns inside their title.
Next, we will find our seed topics, which as we’ve seen earlier are specific topics that we want to be mentioned in the title as well as the pattern.
Here’s an example:
Let’s say I want to build links to an article on cold emails.
I’ll take a look at the main keyword in Ahrefs Keyword Explorer:
  

As we’ve seen before, what most people would do here, is just the standard “skyscraper” method = export the competitor backlinks and reach out to the same people to try and replicate those links.
What we want to do instead, is look through their backlinks to find our seed topics, so that we can then use them to find a ton of other untapped opportunities.
Let’s take the number one page as an example and go through its backlinks. As usual we’re only interested in their dofollow links, and we’re mainly looking at the page titles here.
Here are just a few of the seed topics I’ve found:
  

The next step is to pair these seed topics with our informational article patterns. We can then combine these with some advanced search operators and we’ll get stuff like:
            * intitle:”how to” intitle:”attract new clients”
            * intitle:”why” intitle:”getting new clients”
            * intitle:”guide” intitle:”internship”
and so on…
  

These will give us a ton of other extra opportunities that we would’ve never found if we had just stopped at scraping the competitor’s backlinks.
Once you found these opportunities, you can export the SERP results, run them through a tool like URL profiler (affiliate link) to get all of the SEO metrics and filter the list down to only the best ones.
Find the contact details manually or with a tool like Hunter (affiliate link) and reach out!
Note: As this is basically the skyscraper method on steroid, it’s very important to only do this with your best content assets and only with the ones where it makes sense to do so.
In a lot of cases you’ll be faced with site admins asking for “something in return” for the backlink.
This can take a few different forms, but for the majority of SaaS companies it can be one of the following (or all of them):
            * Free subscription of your product or free trial extension.
            * Affiliate link for your product.
            * Link exchange.
            * Monetary compensation to cover their time to add the link.
Although we do offer all of these depending on the situation, the client and the budget, it’s obviously a good idea to minimize them as much as possible and only keep them for the best opportunities.
Whew, that was a lot of stuff!
Moving on 🙂
Step #4 – How to build links to your main landing pages
What I call “landing pages” for SaaS companies can fall into a few different sub-groups:
            * “Feature” pages – those pages that describe a specific feature or benefit that your software provides.
            * “Dashboard” or “Template” pages – those pages where you provide a standardized dashboard or template that is made with your software and that is geared towards a specific industry, niche or that is solving a specific issue. These could contain free downloadables or gated content (ion exchange for email or subscription).
            * “Uses case” pages – those pages where you basically show how your product can be used to solve a specific problem that people have.
As you probably already know, link building to these pages is very hard.
The main issue with them is that, for the most part, they don’t offer much information and have mostly a commercial intent.
So, for most people the best and only solution ends up being guest posting.
With guest posting, you write the article and you have total control over which links to use within that article (as long as the destination site allows it).
What most people do then, is write a guest post article on a topic related to their landing page and then cleverly link to it within the article in a way that looks as natural as possible.
With us at Growth Gorilla though, we made it our “mission” to only work with existing content that the clients have and for this reason we decided not to do guest posting.
How do we build backlinks to these pages then, you might ask?
It’s pretty simple…
Just because most landing pages are not informational in nature, it doesn’t mean they can’t be!
The content injection method
First off, I don’t take credit for this.
What I call the “content injection” method, is an idea that I came across while talking to the guys at Quickbooks.
Check out their page on sales tax:
  

Looks like a normal landing page (a feature or use-case page to be exact), right?
It has a nice hero image, benefits throughout the page and pricing tables at the bottom.
Let’s take a closer look though:
  

Are those sub-headings? Jump links? What the hell is that??
All of that and more!
You see…
What they are doing here, is injecting informational content into a landing page.
What happens when you click on them?
  

Boom! the page turned into an article!?
And again…
  

Another article with an interactive map to show each state’s unique sales tax laws.
Cool!
And again…
  

Another article or better a survey result article full of interesting (and mentionable) statistics.
Nicely done.
I’m pretty sure until a few days ago, they also had a free calculator within another sub-section, guess they removed it.
The point is, they have found a very clever way of injecting content into a page where this would’ve otherwise been impossible.
Want to know the best thing??
Let’s look at how the URL structure changes when you click the different sub-headings:
The normal URL is this:
            * https://quickbooks.intuit.com/accounting/sales-tax/
When you click on the first sub-section it changes to this:
            * https://quickbooks.intuit.com/accounting/sales-tax/#how-to
This is how it changes for the other sub-sections:
            * https://quickbooks.intuit.com/accounting/sales-tax/#sdakota
            * https://quickbooks.intuit.com/accounting/sales-tax/#sales-tax-survey
You can clearly see how they are using these “jump links” to target very specific keywords while still keeping the main page’s URL in place.
What does this have to do with link building then?
Pretty simple…
They have created informational articles within the main landing page, this allows them, in turn, to build links to the informational articles (a lot easier) while still sending the “link juice” to the main landing page because essentially, they are one and the same!
Using this strategy, you can potentially turn any kind of landing or sales page into a linkable asset.
When you have these assets ready, it’s just a matter of using the same “pattern + seed topic” technique that we’ve covered earlier.
Forget about guest posting, content injection is the future 🙂
Now before the haters say anything, I know.
Not everyone has the budget to do this, it can potentially require some custom coding = big money.
That is, unfortunately, true.
What’s also true is that the ROI for backlinks to these landing pages is WAY higher than backlinks to a blog article for example.
So, it’s just a matter of deciding where to direct your budget based on your priority and strategy.
It’s also important to mention that diversification is always a good thing. Why not use a mix of guest posting and content injection for landing pages?
In the end…
I always try to see link-building with curiosity and a “newbie” eye.
The worst mistake we can do is to pick a strategy or tactic and keep using that until the end of time.
I know I said these frameworks are all you need and that is partly true.
The fact that these are “frameworks” and not specific tactics, makes them more flexible. That said, it’s also important to always keep testing and trying new things. Even the best framework will not be 100% adaptable to everyone and will eventually fail.
The more companies we work with, the more we also realize that there is no 1-size-fits-all process.
I do think it’s important to create and use frameworks though.
They are what allowed us to scale to more than just a handful of clients while still keeping the quality of our work high enough.
No matter what people say, everybody uses systems and processes, even when doing things at a smaller scale, you still have to follow some kind of process.
At the end of the day, every company is unique, each with its own goals and priorities and the ability to create frameworks and systems to accommodate that is, ultimately, what keeps our job fun and interesting 🙂
12. The "Dream" Linkbuilding Strategy
Let’s face two hard facts:
            1. Only 9% of websites and articles get traffic from Google. (Ahrefs)
            2. Even fewer, only 6% of websites and articles make it to the first page of Google (where all the clicks are) within one year of their creation. (also, Ahrefs)
Link building is not complicated, it’s just difficult to do well and create a process that scales, especially when you’re just starting out.
But what if I told you that:
            * You can be a part of that 6%.
            * You can build high-authority links to your website, even if you’re just getting started.
            * And you can do it, by sending just….  one  email  per  day.
100% chance this is your reaction right now:
 
 prolly not 

SKEPTICALLLLLLL.
 
Read on, and I’ll explain how I do it, examples of other people who do it, and how you can do it as well. PLUS, a walkthrough of exactly how I’d do it if I were you.
My Link Building Strategy:
               1. Focus on relationships (not links)
               2. Make your “Dream Link” list
               3. Remember your why
               4. Remember their why
               5. Do your research
               6. Reach Out
               7. Don’t give up
First, please understand this vital first step…
In 2010, I was just starting my journey online and, having read Pat Flynn’s Smart Passive Income blog, I started with a little WordPress site around something I was passionate about.
In my case, this was Brazilian Jiu Jitsu.
I read everything I could, implemented it, and then reached out to Pat to share what worked for me.  Pat ended up inviting me to discuss review it with him as one of the first 50 guests on the SPI Podcast.
It’s meta, but the irony of the email I sent Pat was that I was using a 2020 link building strategy, but we spent all of our time talking about how link building worked back in 2010.
One of the most important things we discussed in that interview was how I was building links to my fledgling blog.  I credited much of my success to Pat’s 2010 article called THE Backlinking Strategy that Works.
 backlinking strategy that works 

Over two-THOUSAND of Pat’s readers have commented on that article, including me:
 blog comment on backlinking strategy that works 

That little comment was my start in SEO.
Since that time, I’ve built and sold my jiu jitsu blog, a jiu jitsu apparel business, built up my own SEO client base and even left teaching high school after a decade in education to lead the SEO team at an incredible web design and marketing agency in Chicago.
 
When I tell you that SEO has radically changed my life, I mean it.
 
And not just because I’m selling some sort of course on SEO or building traffic to my SEO blog.
I believe ANYBODY can use SEO to build an endless pipeline of clients, customers, and (eventually) raving fans that help spread the word about you and your products and services.
I started pursuing SEO so I could build those assets that brought new site visitors in on autopilot and, if you read this entire article, and implement it, just as I did, I promise you’ll find the same results.
You just have to do three things:
               1. Read the article.
               2. Take action on it.
               3. Leave me a comment if you have any questions.
Remember, link building is a moving target so I refuse to write a strategy that will require a new article in four years. I am giving you a strategy that worked forever, not just for now.
Let’s do this.
First, do Links Still Matter For SEO?
In short, yes. I’ve worked with clients ranging from local window washers to global cycling companies and $100M venture-backed startups.
Nothing increases rank (resulting in more traffic and conversions) like backlinks.
But you don’t have to take my word for it.
In their study of over 2 MILLION keywords, Ahrefs found that links have the highest correlation to search rank of all rankings factors:
 ahrefs ranking factor study 

If you want your website to rank, you’re going to need other sites to link to you.
But how do you get those links? First, let’s review what still works
What Link Building Strategies Still Work From 2010 and 2014:
If you’re like me, your first question is, Brendan, what still works from that first backlink strategy article?
Here’s the one thing that the 2010 Backlinking Strategy still get’s right:
Content Matters (Especially for Link Building). Period.
We know there are over 200 different rankings factors in Google’s search engine.
One of the major factors is, and has always been, your content.
According to Glen Allsopp, there are a few types of content that attract links (further helping you rank), such as:
               * Survey Results
               * Rare interviews
               * Super-powered list posts
               * Epic Guides and Tutorials
               * Sharing a strenuous journey
               * Exhaustive comparisons between multiple options
Begging other sites for backlinks sucks. The better your content is, the less you have to beg. If it’s amazing content, you barely even have to ask for links.
Links Matter As Much As Ever (As Long as They’re the Right Ones)
A second ranking factor that has always mattered (second only to the words on the page), and still does today, is backlinks (links from other websites to yours).
Recently, we’ve seen links (by number) matter less than in previous years and we’ve seen links (by quality) matter even more.
If you follow Glen’s advice and create something truly link-worthy, then we have to start asking ourselves how to get those links.
But real quick, I want to share with you my own link-building horror story so you don’t make the same mistake.
What Doesn’t Work Any More in Link Building
First, a quick story:
I was freaking out.
I’d just sold my apparel company and a friend asked me to help him with SEO.
I knew how to write great content, but I wasn’t sure how to scale link-building.
So I followed the advice of the gurus out there:
               1. Create wow content
               2. Reach out – resource page, link roundups, and broken link building,
I reached out to link roundups and resource pages thinking that if I just emailed them, they’d add my links. After all, that’s what all the “backlink guru” articles said.
Just send them an email using the script on the page and 5-10% of them will link to you.
It sounded easy and I knew the ways I’d built links in 2010 didn’t work any more.
So I did. I sent out hundreds of emails:
 dream 100 gif 1 

I followed the directions perfectly, copied the “guaranteed to get links” email templates and found a ton of those pages.
It was brutal doing all that Googling and then recording them in Google sheets. Then came sending out the emails.
But, I figured if this is what the gurus said to do, they had to be right. Right?
I used Gmail’s canned email feature to send over 200 semi-personalized emails.
I probably spent 20+ hours on it, in total.
 bad link outreach emails 

And when the dust settled.
I got three links.
THREE.
On low-level websites.
On low-level websites where the links don’t even exist any more (if the websites even do).
It turns out nobody wants your infographic. Nobody wants your spam emails.
All of that work for nothing.
And that’s when I started to think there might be a better way.
Maybe that sort of outreach works if you have a marketing blog and are trying to get links from other marketing blogs, but that wasn’t my goal.
If I wanted to build links for something really competitive, how many of those spammy emails would I have to send? If I got a high-end SEO client and we assessed they’d need 500+ links to be competitive, that means I’d be on the hook to send 33-THOUSAND emails.
Nope.
Full stop.
Like you, I’m in this to do the hard work now and reap the benefits later and I just didn’t see how sending thousands of emails would get me there.
But then I heard Noah Kagan talk about a book on the Tim Ferriss Show.
So, I read the book (The Ultimate Sales Machine by Chet Holmes) and I took a few notes.
Later, Noah would create a few blog posts about the book, bringing it back into my ecosystem.
Much later, I’d hear Russell Brunson reference the same strategy I’d taken notes on from the book.
But it wasn’t until the whole process came full circle that I had ears to hear.
Glen Allsopp, who I’ve already mentioned above, and I were on a call and he reminded me of this strategy that not only works for sales, networking, and marketing, but also for link-building and everything in between.
This strategy was called “The Dream 100.”
Dream 100: The Link-Building Method That Works Forever (2020 and beyond)
There was one story in Ultimate Sales Machine that really blew me away:
Chet Holmes explains that he was in charge of booking more advertisers for a magazine. There were 2,200 possible advertisers and after some research, he found 167 of them bought 95% of the ads in the industry. He took the outreach budget for the full 2,206.670 and used it to target the 167. Within 6 months, 29 of them were advertising in the magazine.
By focusing only on his dream clients, instead of every possible client, Holmes was able to focus his efforts.
That sounded an awful lot like a really high ROI on outreach to me and I figured it could be applied to link-building (spoiler alert: it can and as I’ll explain below, it’s 100% how I do outreach now).
Whether you started SEO in 2006 (like Glen), or 2010 (like me), links have always been the name of the game.
At the core of this guide is understanding if you want to get great links to your site, they aren’t going to just magically show up.
Links are harder to get than ever before with sites like Forbes no longer linking out with “follow” links (the links that count). More and more larger, authority-level, websites are going follow suit in the years to come and the link opportunities that exist today may not exist in the future.
You’re going to have to go get them.
The good news is that YOU CAN.
What we’re looking for in a Dream link building list is the one-hundred perfect websites to link to you. The ones that, should they all link to you, you wouldn’t need any others.

Does the “relationship” approach really work?
On May 20, 2017 Glen Alsopp sent out an email announcing his new blog at Detailed.com.
When you have relationships with your Dream 100, things like this happen (over 90 new links in two months):
 ahrefs graph of links to detailedcom 

In short order, Glen quickly had 100 links to his new website, and the number of linking domains has climbed steadily from there. What has that done for his organic search traffic?
  

And it’s not just Glen.  Look at what happened with links to Chris Guillebeau’s Side Hustle School:
  

Yes, clearly having relationships with your one-hundred dream websites will absolutely change your website and business.  Even when you launch something totally new, those relationships will continue to pay off.
But what if I’m just getting started?
Starting small is actually great because your first emails aren’t going to be that good.
Start by reaching out to people at your level and then repeat the process again and again.
Then, when you’re ready to reach out to your Tier 2 and Tier 3 folks (more on that shortly), you can approach them with data, with social proof, AND your emails are pretty polished!
Had Ryan Holiday heard of me when I reached out to get his help to fund a classroom set of his books?
No, but he got it fully funded in a few hours and soon after I would write my first article for The Daily Stoic.
Had Pat heard of me when I reached out to share my story with him?
No, but I ended up being one of the first 50 guests on his podcast and I’ve written multiple times for his blog..
Literally every relationship I have online started with some sort of cold outreach. It works for everybody at every level.
A Quick Caveat
This is a tactic that has worked for my own websites, local businesses, global fitness businesses, and all the way up through startups with $100M+ in venture backing.
But, before we talk about how to put together your Dream 100 list for link-building, I want to cover one important question:
DO YOU HAVE A GOOD REASON FOR REACHING OUT?
The reason this tactic works forever is because we’re first going to answer the question that everybody who receives an email from you will think:
“What do they want and why should I read this?”
If you wanted to get a link from me, you could probably just ask me for it, forgetting that I likely gets dozens of requests like that per day, or you could take a step back and consider what I might need help with right now and reach out because of that.
This mindset is crucial to understand before we make our list. We’re reaching out because we have something worth sharing to people whom we’re trying to help, not just to get links.

Link Building Outreach: Making the List
So do I just randomly start emailing the top people in my industry?
Not exactly.
Here’s how I like to break down the first draft of my Dream 100 list of sites that I would love links from (and how I recommend you do as well):
               * Tier 1 (34%) – The first 33 members of your list should be websites that are at the same level as you.
               * Tier 2 (33%) -These are high level blogs, but not impossible to write for. Assuming you are a beginner or recently started finding success, examples here would be Smart Passive Income and Copyblogger.
               * Tier 3 (33%) – These are your moon shots. Your Tim Ferriss or Seth Godin.
Every one of these websites should be of decent authority (not a brand new website or one that doesn’t publish any more) and directly related to what you do.
The biggest mistake that a lot of people make is reaching out to sites that either don’t link out (or “nofollow” all links) or sites that aren’t very active any more.
Writing down your Tier 1 websites is easy so the next question that typically follows is “How do I find Tier 2 and Tier 3 websites for me list?”
               * Check SEO tools – I love tools like Ahrefs where I can
               * Google topics related to your industry and see who ranks highly for very competitive terms
               * Search out a “Blue Ocean” – In this case, I don’t look at direct competitors and focus on others who I share my knowledge with that will care.
               * Look at affiliates for products in your niche (Clickbank, JvZoo, etc.). Is there a leaderboard? These are gold for finding Dream Link opportunities.
Finally, here’s my greatest tip for whether or not I’ll add a website to my Dream link list: I think of it a lot like asking somebody to marry you. If I think they might say no, I’m not asking.
Reaching Out
If you’re still doubting that honest relationships can build links, check out the most (non-affiliate) linked-to sites from Smart Passive Income:
 graph of most linked to sites from smartpassiveincomecom 

Notice a trend there?
It’s literally a who’s who of Pat’s strongest relationships and it shouldn’t come as any surprise.  If I’m writing an article and I know my friend has a great article on the topic, I’m going to link to that.
To kick those relationships off, we need to reach out.
Here are four steps to successful Dream Link Building outreach:

1. Remember your why.
BUT, the key isn’t just to endlessly follow up.  It’s to follow up with something that is interesting and helpful to them.
Your why has to remain to be that you have something

2. Remember their why
Most of the people you’re emailing care about one of two things (typically, both):
               1. Getting results for their audience
               2. Making money
Make sure they know that your content will do magical things for their audience. Show also how it enhances and amplifies what that person already does.

3. Do your research.
I’ll never forget when I interviewed Corbett Barr for my podcast and mentioned something where he went to school and his first job and he replied, “Wow, you really did your homework!”
Nothing impresses somebody more than showing you cared enough to really research them. Don’t worry about sounding creepy. I’d rather sound creepy than send an email that sounds like a vague form letter.

4. Don’t give up.
Most people email somebody once or tweet them once.
Then they give up. You have to be persistent, and you have to do your homework.
Here are a few emails that I had with Sean Blanda when he was the editor for Growthlab:
  

and here’s his email to me when the post we worked on finally went live:
  

For those of us keeping score at home, that means the article took nearly a year to complete.
But what was the result of that work: a link? Yes. But also a fantastic professional relationship with Sean. One that I wouldn’t trade for anything.
Relationships matter infinitely more than links. As we saw with SPI above, the links happen quite easily after you become friends with somebody.
For every 100 emails you send out (this will take some serious time if you’re doing it right), expect *maybe* 30 replies. 15 will do what they say they will. 10 follow through until the end.
But you only need a few to start.
When do I stop emailing people? Either when they’re totally unresponsive or they ask for money.  I don’t want to waste my time and certainly don’t want to build a friendship with somebody who wants me to pay for it.

The Dream Link Building Outreach Email Template
I’m loathe to include a sample email script in this article for fear that people will forget to customize it appropriately. Remember, that is my biggest gripe with the 2014 method of link outreach: simply saying “send them an email and get links” is woefully inaccurate.
If I absolutely had to break down the basics for great Dream link building outreach, the first email should include:
               1. I would show them that I know them and what’s important to them right away.
               2. Tell them who you are, why you’re interesting, and prove you can help them.
That’s it.
It is simple but it is NOT easy.
Nothing about you. No ask. No pitch. Just connection and an honest attempt to start a friendship.
Next, we’ll take a look at what that looks like, beginning to end.
A Walkthrough of this Link Building Strategy
I want to show you how this looks, end-to-end. Far too many examples show how things work in the marketing niche and, frankly, what works in the SEO/marketing niche doesn’t work the same in the real world.
So let’s say I had a blog about something totally unrelated to online marketing, like, gardening.
So when I start to put together my Dream Link List for my gardening blog, I want to look for sites that are related to my topic and of decent authority.
The easiest way to start this list is to google “gardening blog” and see what comes up. It looks like most results are lists of blogs, but one gardening blog stands out:
  

I’m using Ahrefs here (but you can easily use the free Moz toolbar with the same effect):
  

It appears to be of high authority (76/100) and it’s definitely related to my topic. So my next step is to start considering how to reach out to them.
Looking in the footer of the blog, I can see that they not only have an email list that I can sign up for (2), but also a variety of social channels that I can engage with them in (3).
  

But the most interesting part is that they may feature writers on their website. Let’s see where that link takes us:
  

Looking further, something really stands out: They pay their writers (wow, they’re serious about this. We made a good choice for them being in our Dream Link List). But also, they have no interest in working with people who just want links.
This is great. They must be INUNDATED with people using the same 2014 email template asking for links with phrases like “Either way, keep up the great work you’re doing with SITE.”
And they’re tired of it.
So let’s reverse engineer what they want from this site and give them something fresh.
A few things stand out to me:
               * The have ads all over the site. It must be a significant source of revenue for them. From that, I know that they need a lot of site visitors to make money.
               * Their YouTube channel hasn’t been touched in 5 years but they have ~90k followers on Instagram and updated it yesterday. The same is also true of their Twitter.
               * Now, where they really shine is Pinterest where they have about 4 MILLION monthly views and Facebook with a about a half-million likes. That’s significant.
               * They also work with advertisers and their media kit is extremely professional laying out what it takes to work with them (they’ll even write for your blog if you pay them). I just have to contact Shelley (great, another person to touch base with!) to learn more.
               * In their ‘About’ page I noticed it was started by Heather Rhoades and they take tremendous pride in the work they do. I also learned they donate significantly to Kiva and to local school and community gardens (including offering a garden sponsorship program).
               * In fact, I could even leverage my SEO knowledge to tell them that their blog being on a subdomain (blog.gardeningknowhow.com) is killing their SEO because Google sees it as a totally separate website from their root domain.
Using Hunter.io, I checked out the emails just to see if there were any other than the editor and Shelley and it confirmed those were probably my two best leads.
Using the information above, I’d compose two totally separate emails because the editor and Shelley have very different “why’s.”
Repeating this process 100 times may take me 50-100 hours.
Again, why am I taking so much time with this?
This company could be potential affiliates of mine in the future, they could come on my podcast, or ask me for help when they start their own, or a myriad of other things beyond just getting a link.
This tactic is, in my mind, the strongest link-building strategy out there, but it’s also so much more.
When you focus on the relationships first, everything else is much easier.
It’s way better than the strategy I used to use that took 20+ hours and resulted in zero links and, worse yet, zero relationships.
Case Studies & Teardowns
Lastly, let's close with some detailed teardowns and case studies that highlight the exact tactics and strategies that successful SaaS companies have used to win with SEO.
13. How Zapier Used SEO to Reach $35M ARR
Want to drive more search traffic to your SaaS with SEO?
In this SaaS SEO case study, we’ll step outside the usual content marketing tactics most SaaS companies use. And look at how Zapier leverages SEO to drive millions of high intent searchers to their product every month.
This strategy has nothing to do with blogging (although we’ll take a look at how they added a blog later to enhance this approach).
We’ll also walk through…
               * How they created 70,000 search optimized landing pages.
               * How they filled these pages with unique content, without having to write it themselves.
               * How they launch each page to generate a bunch of high quality backlinks right out of the gate.
               * And how they use organic search to create a more powerful network effect.
Zapier Company Overview
Zapier is an app integration and automation platform that lets users (primarily SMBs) set-up triggered actions and workflows between different applications. They started in 2011 and have only raised $1.3M in venture funding, primarily bootstrapping their way to $140M ARR. Currently they have over 5,000 apps on their platform.
Capturing Millions of High Intent Searchers Each Month
According to SimilarWeb, Zapier receives 5.8M visits a month.
  

Of total traffic, over half comes from search.
  

How to Make Something Invisible Stand Out
Like other middleware SaaS, Zapier faced the challenge of having an “invisible” product. Their app didn’t perform customer facing actions but instead formed connections behind the scenes to unlock new functionality and value from existing apps.
Rather than trying to pitch users on the value of integrating tools, Zapier realized early on that people were already looking for specific integrations. To capture this existing intent, Zapier decided to make the app partners in their integration ecosystem the stars of their marketing and piggyback on their success.
They did this by creating three tiers of landing pages for every app in their ecosystem:
               1. A landing page for the app itself.
               2. A separate landing page for every app to app integration e.g. a page all about connecting Gmail with Trello.
               3. Separate landing pages for every single app to app triggered workflow or “zap” that exists between each app.
Whether someone is looking for general info on an app, how to integrate two apps together, or a specific app to app use case or scenario Zapier has a landing page ready to capture that intent.
That makes for a lot of landing pages. According to data from Ahrefs, there are 69,263 of these landing pages ranking in the top 100 of Google. And 18,585 of the pages have a first page ranking for at least one keyword.
Zapier’s Playbook for Scaling 70,000 Search Optimized Landing Pages
Creating 70k landing pages is one of those things that sounds crazy without some hack or workaround. But Zapier’s “hacks” look a lot more like persistent effort combined with smart systems thinking and a solid understanding of SaaS SEO.
One of the things you might be tempted to hack with landing pages at this scale would be using some kind of repeatable content template, since the content creation side would be the most time intensive. Just change a few keywords for each app and voila, right? But Zapier recognized the SEO value of each page having unique, relevant content.
While their pages do have a templated structure and layout, each page also has human created descriptions of the apps and summaries of each integration. And we’re not just talking about a few lines of unique text, many of the pages have multi-paragraph overviews that drill into deeper features and benefits.
  

Outsourcing SEO Content to Partners
But rather than write all this content themselves, Zapier created a playbook for onboarding and launching new app partners. Part of this onboarding process includes getting app partners to write the content for these landing pages. If needed, it also includes editorial guidelines for the Zapier team to clean up the content to make it a perfect fit for each landing page.
Not only does this free up one of the most time intensive SaaS SEO elements, but it also generates the most relevant content from the people who have the best understanding of each app’s use cases – the app creators themselves.
Outsourcing Link Building to Partners
Zapier also leverages partner help in getting some initial backlinks to new landing pages. Their onboarding process for new apps includes:
               * Getting partners to set-up an integrations page on their site linking back to Zapier.
               * Getting partners to write a post announcing the integrations on their blog.
               * Adding links to a few of the top “zaps” directly in the partner’s app.
Not only do these partner promotion tactics generate a stream of new users for Zapier, but they also provide an initial set of backlinks to help boost the page rankings. Then there’s the initial exposure that may get the integrations written about on industry blogs, or shared on social media. Garnering more backlinks.
Zapier Transitions from an Editorial Driven to Pure Programmatic Approach
One of the biggest changes Zapier has made since I originally outlined their approach in 2018 is streamlining the original content editorial process described above. At the time, they had created roughly 25,000 landing pages using partner written original content.
Skip ahead to 2022, and you can see they have switched to a much shorter snippet of original content on each app partner landing page. Instead of multiple paragraphs of partner written original content, Zapier’s newer app partners receive just a single line of unique text on an otherwise templated landing page.
  

It’s difficult to pinpoint the exact impact this change has had on Zapier’s programmatic page rankings.
However, if we look at historical rankings data from Ahrefs we can see that there was a slow and steady drop in first page rankings for Zapier’s landing pages over the last several years.
  
Snapshot of ranking positions in the 1st-10th range.
On the flip side, we can see that over the past year rankings have improved sharply, hinting that the pure programmatic approach is still very effective (keeping in mind that older app partner landing pages still incorporate the longer form original content; only newer landing pages have the shorter original content snippets).
This recent uptick in rankings is most likely driven from the recent surge in referring domains (backlinks). However, it still shows that with the right backlink strategy pure programmatic landing pages with minimal original content can rank very well.
  
Number of referring domains to app landing pages.
Amplifying and Protecting Your Network Effect With SEO
Middleware SaaS platforms like Zapier are one of the most obvious examples of network effects in SaaS. As Zapier adds new app partners to its integrations list, its platform becomes more attractive and valuable for end users. And the more end users attracted to the platform, the more apps want to join the platform. It’s a virtuous cycle.
Zapier’s programmatic SEO strategy plugs into this network effect seamlessly and amplifies its impact. Each new app partner leads to a new set of app landing pages, expanding Zapier’s ability to capture high intent searchers. The more new users Zapier generates from this search traffic, the more enticing the platform becomes to new app partners. Which leads to more app landing pages. Another virtuous cycle.
These landing pages also have a protective effect on Zapier’s expanding network, essentially surrounding it with an “acquisition moat” that competitors must cross if they want to effectively compete with Zapier. This adds an extra layer of difficulty for a fresh competitor entering the same space.
This is in contrast to acquisition channels like paid search and paid advertising, which allow you to quickly expand your reach to a large audience but aren’t ideal for protecting your network long term due to the high cost of sustaining paid acquisition.
But Just How Protective of a Moat Does Programmatic SEO Provide?
Four years on, we have a clearer sense of how effective Zapier’s programmatic landing page “moat” has been at insulating it from competition.
For the long tail, low competition keywords that these landing pages thrive on the main competition for Zapier has been either a) native integration knowledge base pages, or b) other connector services similar to Zapier.
Because of the low competition nature of these keywords, it has been quite easy for competitors to land on the first page of results alongside Zapier with similar programmatic landing pages.
However, in many of these cases, Zapier is still at the top of the pile – appearing higher in the results than competitors.
  

While appearing higher on the first page of search results may seem inconsequential, it likely means Zapier is taking home the lion’s share of the traffic from these searches. Below you can see data from Backlinko highlighting just how important your ranking is to the real world clicks you’ll receive from searchers.
  

Zapier’s ability to rank higher than competitors likely comes down to their backlink authority. This is a key point for anyone considering a programmatic SEO strategy in a space where competitors are following a similar strategy. In order to win rankings in both the short and long term, an effective backlink strategy will be essential.
But are backlinks the only way to go head to head and win with programmatic SEO?
Beyond Backlinks: The New Programmatic SEO Battlefield
As we’ve discussed so far, Zapier has been able to maintain dominance with it’s programmatic pages largely because of it’s monster backlink authority.
We also highlighted the hypothesis that Zapier’s rankings may have fallen over time by switching to a pure programmatic approach; adding only single line unique descriptions of partner apps to new landing pages vs. their previous approach of incorporating multiple paragraphs of editorial content for each app.
Indeed, one of the key ways to compete in SEO beyond backlinks is to create more and better original on page content vs. competing pages. If Google is given the choice between a page following a template with only a few snippets of unique content, and a page with many paragraphs of relevant, unique content – the latter will likely win, all else being equal.
The key word here being relevant content. This is where a lot of templated programmatic approaches lose. It’s hard to maintain a high level of relevance across thousands or tens of thousands of pages by only replacing short text snippets across each page. Today’s Google algorithm is extremely sophisticated in how it understands semantic text in the context of the topic being searched. And it can be difficult for a templated page to match a page with editorial content that includes semantic text more closely aligned with the target topic and keywords.
When formulating your programmatic SEO strategy, there are two new approaches worth considering to address this issue:
Adding More Unique Text Snippets to Improve Semantic Context
Manually written text snippets are of course an option. And as described earlier in this article, they can even be scalable with the right process in place (like how Zapier originally outsourced text descriptions to their app partners).
However, adding any kind of editorial content development to the workflow will inevitably limit speed and scale on some level. This is likely why Zapier themselves switched to a more simple programmatic approach.
But is there a way to expand original content on programmatic pages in a more efficient and scalable way?
The easiest approach is to simply add more unique text snippets, ideally from an existing database of some kind. A great example of this is Pitchbook, which incorporates dozens of unique snippets into their company profile pages.
  
Pitchbook company profile for Zoom, incorporating many unique data and content snippets.
Pitchbook’s pages follow a clear programmatic template. But the template is populated with dozens of placeholders for unique data from Pitchbook’s database.
SaaS companies are uniquely positioned to take advantage of this approach, since they are more likely to have access to relevant, proprietary data that could be incorporated into templated pages.
The point on proprietary data is worth highlighting here. If the nature of your SaaS (or any type of product) means you have collected a database of useful information that you’ve established ethical rights to share in some meaningful way, this gives you a huge potential edge over competitors without that data. You have the power to create richer, higher context programmatic pages that will be challenging for competitors to knock off. Which means you can much more easily dominate those organic search keyword categories long term.
But even if you don’t have exclusive access to a database of relevant data snippets, we live in a world of APIs that grant you access to all kinds of interesting data and information. With a little creativity, who knows how these could be mixed and matched into a highly valuable set of web pages that funnel visitors into your product solutions.
Responsible Use of Emerging AI Writing Tools
Another area I see a lot of potential in for expanding the capabilities of programmatic pages is emerging AI writing tools like Jasper.ai or Writesonic.
Rather than rely on manually written text snippets to add to your programmatic templates, you can now leverage AI writing assistants to compose draft text for you, and dramatically accelerate your content development workflow.
As they stand today, I don’t think these should be set loose unsupervised i.e. there should still be a human editorial process in place to ensure content quality. And they won’t make sense for every programmatic SEO use case.
But I think programmatic pages are one of the best places to begin experimenting with AI writing tools, because you’re starting with a solid human guided content structure and page template that the AI written content can be added to. This will allow you to ensure your pages are providing genuine value and delivering on the search intent. And avoid the potential issues of clogging up the internet with rehashed garbage that will inevitably flow from some of these tools.
Today, it’s easy to imagine an AI writer that could visit each of Zapier’s app partner websites and write a great summary of the product, along with a list of each app’s top features and benefits.
Using Content Marketing to Increase Search Traffic and Generate Demand Early In The Customer Journey
Zapier’s network of app and integration landing pages work great at drawing in visitors searching for a specific app or integration. However, there are also a lot of people searching for more general app categories and use cases that these landing pages don’t rank as well for.
These searchers haven’t yet narrowed their search down to a specific app, and are performing mid funnel research on apps available in a specific category. Or they’re doing top of funnel research on solutions to a specific problem or use case, and may not even be aware that an app is a good way to solve their problem.
In order to connect with these searchers, Zapier created a blog and content marketing strategy that focuses on exploring different app use cases and reviewing apps in different categories.
  

By not waiting until a need for a specific integration arises and exposing users to Zapier’s integrations early in the customer journey, Zapier is able to cast a wider net and generate new demand for its service.
This also positions Zapier’s integrations as a key consideration when choosing an app and building a software stack – rather than an afterthought that comes when you are trying to fill gaps in your existing stack.
Programmatic SEO as an Early Stage Growth Strategy, While Growing Long Term Blog Rankings
One of the most interesting things about Zapier’s overall SEO strategy, is that they used their programmatic pages to drive bottom funnel, high intent visitors early in the company’s growth journey. Without losing sight of the long term potential of blog traffic.
As you can see from the Ahrefs snapshot below, these programmatic pages achieved significant traffic volume relatively quickly after launching. Likely due to the low competition nature of the long tail branded keywords these landing pages were targeting.
  
Organic traffic history for Zapier’s app landing pages. Source: Ahrefs
But factors like increased competition (among others we discussed earlier), have meant their traffic to these programmatic pages more or less plateaued. Despite increasing the number of apps and programmatic pages over time.
Even without other entrants into the app integration space competing for similar terms, programmatic pages targeting low competition, low volume keywords would still be likely to plateau quickly. If the pages achieve good rankings out of the gate due to low competition, there’s just not additional room for growth outside of expansion into other keyword targets.
However, Zapier wasn’t only focused on their programmatic pages. While these app landing pages were churning out new customers early on, they continued to focus on slowly and steadily building blog content and backlink authority.
Below, you can see a snapshot of Zapier’s blog traffic over the same time period:
  
Organic traffic history for Zapier’s blog pages. Source: Ahrefs
On the 15th of May, 2018 the blog and the programmatic pages were essentially tied for the amount of traffic they were generating.
But while the programmatic landing pages more or less peaked at that traffic level, the blog continued to grow. Today it receives 3X that traffic, and is the main organic traffic engine for the company.
This highlights the slow growing nature of blog content targeting competitive, high volume keywords. Blogs tend to take much longer to gain traction, due to the large backlink authority that must be built in order to rank for more competitive keywords. In this way, the programmatic pages acted as a great early stage booster engine while the blog was still gaining momentum.
Creating Synergy In Your Content Funnel
Programmatic landing pages can be a highly effective part of your SEO and content marketing strategy. In fact, I think it would be fair to hypothesize that even though Zapier’s blog receives 3X as much traffic today, their programmatic pages may actually drive more new user sign ups due to the bottom funnel nature of the keywords these pages target.
However, Zapier’s full funnel content strategy clearly wins over a straight programmatic play. Each month they are attracting millions of new visitors into their ecosystem, to be nurtured and educated in a way that fits the stage each visitor is at in the journey of a potential Zapier customer.
The blog also helps build a tremendous amount of backlink authority, by acting as a magnet for external links with its broadly appealing blog content. And this backlink authority flows back into the programmatic pages with internal links like the one shown below, helping to boost rankings across the entire content funnel.
  

What The Future Holds for Programmatic SEO
Zapier provides a leading example of how to successfully leverage programmatic SEO to fuel SaaS growth, particularly in the early stages of an SEO program. But emerging technologies and increasing competition are already driving the development of newer, more effective programmatic strategies.
Programmatic approaches seem likely to become a much bigger focus in SEO moving forward. But more than that, I see it also becoming much more integrated into a variety of other SEO strategies. In the future, the lines between SEO strategies will become more and more blurry – with hybrid approaches playing a larger role.
For example, there are already many sites with user generated content that also have programmatic elements (like Leafly or Tripadvisor). It’s easy to imagine how programmatic data and content snippets could enrich editorial content, bringing web pages to life with the most up to date contextual information.
Meanwhile, Natural Language Processing algorithms continue to evolve at a rapid pace, and are showing up in easy to use AI writing tools. Potentially creating a perfect storm of new content marketing possibilities when combined with programmatic tactics.
In the end, it will be up to all of us to decide whether we want to use these new technologies and approaches for good; developing creative ways to extract and share valuable new insights with the citizens of the web. Or if we will give into the temptation of easy KPI wins, and clog up the internet with more useless garbage.


14. Breaking Down the Genius of Hubspot's Website Grader
Hubspot launched the Website Grader in 2007.


Today, Hubspot's Grader gets 25k+ organic visits /mos, has 1.2M backlinks and assists in the acquisition of millions of dollars in revenue each year.


This product changed the marketing industry & Hubspot.


Let's dive into it 🧵👇The original app was created by @dharmesh after he and @bhalligan became tired of manually evaluating the sites of prospective Hubspot customers. 


They’d manually determine: 


Are there links to the sites? Is there a blog? How often are they writing? Are SEO basics covered? Etc.


Then one day... In @dharmesh's own words:


"Out of my own personal laziness and obsession with AUTOMATING ALL THE THINGS"


They took this app and turned it into a public facing tool for people to get a report on how good their website was. 


It was a hit. Millions have used it. In 2009 alone the tool had generated 30,000+ links, 50,000+ emails and 1.1M reports.


Today, it does numbers like this every quarter.


A study conducted by @FoundationIncCo found that free tools are the most linkable asset in SaaS. This solidifies it.


Today, the Website Grader is a beautiful experience that is powered by Google Lighthouse. 


It's doing a lot of things right: 


> Capturing new leads
> Nurturing relationships
> Generating quality links
> Ranking # 1 for Website Grader
> Educating people on-site opportunities


The original app took public info on and around your site and gave you a grade & report. Here's where the marketing brilliance comes in:


Your email was needed to get the report.


AND back in 2007, the people who cared about their website grade were potential Hubspot customers.


The Grader was such a hit that @TechCrunch even wrote a piece about the site suggesting that it was a great way for brands & people to learn how to get their website "high up in natural search results" 


Trust me..


Almost everyone with a site in 2008 was using it.Hubspot generated THOUSANDS of emails (lots of leads)  through this tool. And as the leads came in - The growth opportunity became more clear. 


Hubspot needed more Graders. 


So that's what they did. 


Press Release Grader, Book Grader, Facebook Grader, Twitter Grader and more.


One of their hits was The Twitter Grader


It would tally up your "followers and followings" and rank your Twitter page numerically against other pages. 


This created a bit of a controversy and competition in the early days of Twitter. Both helped raise Hubspots profile.The Twitter Grader was originally a part of a bigger social media project but after @dharmesh explained he could spin this thing out in a day (at 2AM)... 


The team was sold. 


Let's ship it.


On day one, it graded 5,000 profiles. While the Twitter Grader no longer exists.


The idea behind 'graders' still run deep at Hubspot. 


Hubspot has a handful of free tools that people can use to do things like check their SSL certificate, make personas or generate blog post ideas.What's the goal of these tools? 


Generate leads, awareness and sales.


Check this: 


In 2017, the email signature tool generated 524k visits, 51k leads, 1.5k influenced opps, 122 influenced wins & $8.5M in new customer LTV.


Source: https://learn.g2.com/the-worlds-most-effective-b2b-marketing-campaign…


Ching. Ching.


Today, when you use the Hubspot Website Grader you're not just met with a website report & score.


You're met with call to actions offering you to learn more about an issue by enrolling in free courses or speeding things up with a free Hubspot trial.


This is MQL gold.


Identifying content opportunities like these for your niche and business can be challenging but with just one or two:


You can unlock a new stream of growth for traffic, links and quality leads. It's smart to start with:


Research. 


Talk to customers & analyze search trends.Some key things to keep in mind:


> Use keyword research to guide your approach
> Identify arbitrage opportunities
> Understand the current SERP
> UX & Content is key




15. How HelloSign Scaled Their Traffic 1,308%
It was a frigid cold day in Des Moines on January 28, 2019. 
Like most January days, I was just hoping to hold on a few more weeks until the early signs of Spring would start to thaw things out and give me that yearly boost of energy.
But, it turned out that I was going to get a different kind of jolt.
“Dropbox Acquires HelloSign for $230mm,” the headline read in my push notifications.
I stared at it for a long time.
A combination of shock and elation took hold as I bounded out of bed.
HelloSign and Optimist had been working together for nearly two years at this point. But I had no idea that the acquisition was in play. The whole deal has been kept under wraps. Most of the team only found out about it right before it was finalized.
It was a momentous achievement for the HelloSign team—and I felt lucky to have been along for even a small part of the ride as their content marketing partner.
 HelloSign's Organic Traffic Growth (October 2017 to January 2019) 

Over the preceding 17 months, Optimist worked closely with the HelloSign team to create and execute a strategic SaaS content marketing plan. During that time, we saw their organic traffic grow by 1,308%. This correlated almost perfectly with their business growth and subsequent acquisition.
This article is about our journey with HelloSign and what we learned about SaaS content marketing along the way.
From Series B to Acquisition: The Two-Year SaaS Content Marketing Journey
When our team first started working with HelloSign in 2017, they had just raised their $16MM Series B round. They were on a path to rapidly expand their eSignature solution, roll out HelloWorks, and move upmarket with HelloSign integrations and API.
There was a ton of content and strategy to figure out.
Luckily, both our team and the HelloSign team are full of outrageously smart people. We dug in and created a SaaS content marketing strategy that could support their very ambitious goals.
Throughout this process—and in working with many other SaaS companies over the years—we developed and refined some key strategies and tactics that we use to drive growth for all our clients. 
We learned a ton about how content marketing for SaaS can provide value to prospects at every stage of the funnel, drive site traffic, and, ultimately, increase conversions.
What is SaaS Content Marketing?
SaaS content marketing is a broad term for when SaaS brands use content—written, image, video, or audio content—as a marketing tool to achieve marketing goals.
It’s a central pillar of a digital marketing strategy.
B2B SaaS companies, in particular, often invest in content marketing in order to execute an inbound marketing strategy—attracting traffic (primarily from search engines and social media, but also using other marketing channels) and converting them into users and customers.
Content marketing and SaaS SEO generally go hand-in-hand as a way to quickly scale traffic and user sign-ups without relying on paid acquisition.
Driving Product Sign-Ups with SaaS Content Marketing
Before we get into the specifics of how we executed this strategy, I want to reveal the framework that we use to shape our thinking and our approach. 
 saas content marketing framework 

This framework builds on our trifecta strategy that we originally developed from my work scaling College Raptor from 0 to 100,000 organic searches/mo. 
But, given the specific nuances of the SaaS business model and the extended B2B buyer’s journey, it’s not a simple cut-and-paste process. 
The framework that we developed integrates key insights about how buyers interact with SaaS businesses and which strategies are most effective for driving actual conversions.
For our work with HelloSign, we applied a framework similar to this. Ultimately, we’ve found that most SaaS businesses have similar goals and thus, the overall approach to content marketing is a variation of this general framework. 
Although there are many potential content marketing goals that could be appropriate for a SaaS company, the vast majority have pretty straightforward needs:
               1. Increase qualified traffic
               2. Drive product sign-ups and/or trials
               3. Everything else (Brand awareness, leads, emails, etc)
HelloSign is no different. 
Although there were a number of market forces and products in play, the ultimate business objective of our work with HelloSign was to increase user signups.
So, that’s what we set out to do. 
The question was, how can you use SaaS content marketing to drive relevant traffic, show the product, and traffic into users?
Many SaaS companies struggle with this because they focus too much on one or the other. 
Either they chase keyword volume and end up with lots of traffic and no sign ups. Or they focus too much on their product and struggle to get people to their site.
So, how can you strike a balance between providing value to your audience and value to your business?
The key is to unpack the various moving parts and create a SaaS content marketing strategy that addresses each specific goal and also solves for the overarching business objectives. 
In other words, break it down and solve for each piece independently. Then pull everything together into a cohesive SaaS content marketing plan.
This is what we’ll unpack in our guide. 
Our approach follows these steps:
               1. Define content marketing goals
               2. Identify target audience
               3. Research content distribution and promotion channels
               4. Determine content types and formats
               5. Map key content to the buyer’s journey
               6. Research and develop the content roadmap
               7. Create, publish, measure, and optimize
Let’s start by setting a goal that we’re trying to achieve. 
SaaS Content Marketing Goals
One of the founding principles behind Optimist and our work with clients is that not all content is the same.
Different types of content can support different goals. And, that content should work together to drive the overall business outcomes (leads, conversions, sales, revenue).
Before you can put a plan into action, you need to understand the desired outcome.
That means pausing to ask, “What would success look like?”
For most SaaS companies, common goals for their content marketing involve driving product signup, trials, and website traffic. 
But that’s not always the case. 
Depending on your current growth trajectory, PMF, and product stage, there are plenty of other goals that can factor into your success. For example, some other SaaS content marketing goals that might be on your radar include:
               * Building brand awareness
               * Creating a pre-launch waitlist
               * Generating leads
               * Attracting a new market segment
               * Growing your email list
               * Upselling to larger plans
               * Improving retention
               * Increasing customer lifetime value
Keep in mind that the goals and metrics you choose will affect all of your content marketing choices. Of course, your goals might shift along with market changes, customer feedback, new releases, and your company’s growth. That’s normal.
Once we have a primary objective—a “north star goal”— then we can define the specific metrics that we’ll use to measure progress.
1. Define the current state of your product
This is one of the biggest factors when it comes to informing your SaaS content marketing goals—and it’s pretty straightforward.
Is your SaaS product pre-launch (e.g., in development or beta), recently launched (e.g., pre-traction or initial growth), or established within the market with clear product-market fit?
SaaS startups in the pre-launch phase—whether their product is still in development or beta testing—will have very different content marketing goals than businesses with a live product and growing customer base. 
2. Decide where you want your business to be six months from now
Look at where your SaaS product is now and compare it to where you want it to be in the next six months. 
Content marketing is not an overnight venture. So, you shouldn’t be setting plans for next week when thinking about the goals for your content marketing strategy.
Ask yourself a simple question: What would success look like 6 months from now?
Do you want to increase revenue from existing accounts, bump up your trial conversion rate, or tap into new lead sources? The more specific you can get, the better.
Ideally, pin a specific sales, lead generation, or revenue KPI to your content marketing.
3. Identify what needs to happen for you to get there
The magic happens when you recognize what levers need to be pulled in order to move from where you are now to achieving your growth goal.
               * If you’re early stage in your growth and not seeing much traffic, then you’ll want to begin by building an SEO strategy and identifying the high-value keywords that will attract your target buyers
               * If you’re seeing a decent amount of website traffic but struggling to convert, you’ll likely want content that demonstrates product value and helps convert blog readers into SaaS leads and you’ll want to focus on optimization—implementing CTAs, improving the quality of content, and increasing conversion rates across your site
               * If your goal is to grow your email list so you can nurture prospects with a sales workflow—in which case a combination of mid-funnel blog content + qualifying lead magnets might be just what you needIn some cases
When we began working with HelloSign, their north-star goal was simple: Scale inbound signups and trial activations.
Based on that, we were able to define key metrics and tactics as part of the strategy:
               * Grow top and middle of the funnel traffic from search
               * Grow top of the funnel traffic from social
               * Increase topical authority and rankings for middle-of-the-funnel product pages
The solution is to create a framework that leverages top of the funnel content to generate not just traffic, but also links (domain and topical authority) that help these important pages rank over time.
This has become the basis of our approach to SaaS content marketing for our clients.
Identifying the Target Audience(s) 
Before we could tailor this framework to support HelloSign’s specific growth goals, we need a clear view of their potential customers and their ideal customer profile (ICP). That meant learning everything we could about their paying customers’ pain points, needs, and influences on their buying decision.
How well do you know your customers? 
In addition to researching market trends and tracking the user experience and buying journey for your product, it’s worthwhile to ask customers for input directly.
               * How did they first discover your product?
               * What problems does it solve for them?
               * What other solutions did they consider?
               * What made them choose you over competitors? 
               * Why did they select their current plan? 
When it comes to creating content that speaks to your audience, knowing your customers—who they are, what challenges are they facing, and what motivates them—is crucial. 
Approaching SaaS content marketing through the lens of the customer allows you to:
               * Understand the buyer’s journey – In order to create relevant content that helps buyers at each stage of their purchase journey, you’ll need to first understand who those customers are and then examine their path to purchase.
               * Create content for individual buyers or decision makers – Creating generic content will never be as effective as highly targeted, specific content that speaks directly to the needs and pain points of a real human.
               * Conduct keyword research – If SEO is one of your primary goals and channels, then you’ll need to understand the buyer so you can find high-intent, specific keywords to target with your pages and content.
               * Identify relevant marketing channels – By understanding your audience, you can better understand where they spend their time and how they consume content. 
               * Define key content formats – Which types of content your target audience reads, watches, or listens to should inform your own content strategy.
               * Position your product – The content itself can better position your product if you understand the context of the buyer.
               * Create better content – Simply put, you’ll be able to create better, more relevant, more useful, and more effective content by better understanding your target reader.
By identifying your target audience(s), you’ll also be able to determine which channels and content types you should create in order to reach those potential buyers. This is the next key step to defining what your strategy will look like.
 finding content channel audience fit 

Content Distribution Channels
Depending on which channels you’re going to use to distribute your content (get it in front of your ideal buyer), you’ll need to also choose the right types of content that work well for those particular channels.
Some channels that you might consider including in your strategy:
               * Email
               * Social media – LinkedIn, Twitter, Facebook, Reddit forums
               * Search engines (SEO)
Again, the channels that you choose to target will play a big role in the types of content—and the content itself—that you end up creating.
For instance, the content that you create for an existing email list—people who are familiar with your product and have likely already demonstrated a specific need—should be different from the content that you create to build brand awareness and attract new potential customers from search engines.
Content Types and Formats
Now, based on the audience you’re trying to reach and the channels you’re using to reach them, you can define which content formats will work as part of your strategy.
If your audience is mostly knowledge workers who research and solve problems via the Internet, then you’re probably targeting them via search (SEO), which means you need to write and optimize long-from content targeting relevant keywords.
This content might look like:
               * Blog posts
               * Articles
               * How-to content
               * Guides
You might pair these with thought leadership content and other formats meant to attract backlinks, like infographics.
Other content formats work specifically for a sales-led buying journey.
For instance, white papers, ebooks, templates, and webinars are an effective way to educate and nurture potential customers who aren’t ready to enter into a sales discussion.
If you’re targeting buyers mostly through social media, then you might consider creating native-format content (Tweet threads, LinkedIn articles, etc).
Lastly, consider other media formats like video and podcasts, especially if your audience spends a lot of time consuming content on YouTube or their mobile device.
The SaaS Content Marketing Funnel: A Top-Down View
When we put together a content marketing strategy, we must begin by understanding the customer journey.
These are each of the steps that a potential customer may take before deciding to sign up or purchase the software. The customer journey itself will also be determined largely by the GTM (go-to market) strategy.
For most users, HelloSign is a product-led SaaS business, meaning that the main step we want users to take is to simply try the product itself—get a free trial or sign up for a free account.
But for enterprise users, there’s a more traditional sales funnel that includes a longer evaluation and buying cycle.
The SaaS content marketing funnel can be broken down into four main sections:
               1. Pre-funnel content 
               2. Top of the funnel content
               3. Mid-funnel content
               4. Bottom-of-the-funnel content
Content played a key role at each of these stages in helping HelloSign attract, qualify, persuade, and convert traffic into users and users into customers. 
But before we dig into the specifics of how we used content at each stage of the funnel to promote HelloSign’s goals, here’s a quick overview of the stages themselves. 
Pre-funnel content is used to attract potential leads who aren’t necessarily shopping for a solution—yet. This content appeals to anyone who fits the ideal buyer persona and provides solutions and insights that don’t necessarily tie into the product itself. 
Top of the funnel content is written for leads who are problem-aware and beginning to research solutions. This could be anyone who is actively searching how to deal with a pain point—but is still a long way from making a purchase. 
Content geared for this audience is typically evergreen, educational, and problem-oriented. It often highlights the benefits of the SaaS product and positions it as a possible solution to the prospect’s problem. 
Mid-funnel content is even more directly linked to the SaaS product. This includes features pages, case studies, and other product-related content like implementation guides and walkthroughs. 
At this stage, the goal is to educate and persuade readers on the benefits and outcomes of using this product in particular.
Bottom of the funnel content can lean into more product-heavy sales pitches that position the SaaS product as the ultimate solution.
Leads interested in bottom-funnel content are primed to make a purchase and are looking for information and proof that either supports or changes their opinion. They might be comparing a few different brands with the intention of signing up for a trial or paid account.
Now let’s take a more detailed look at the various types of content that were part of HelloSign’s growth strategy.
Pre-Funnel SaaS Content: Targeting the Right Buyers
Before we dive into the actual funnel and the buyer’s journey, I want to begin with what we call pre-funnel or persona-qualified content. Although it’s often at least one step removed from a buying cycle, pre-funnel content can serve an important supporting role in a SaaS content marketing strategy. The idea here is to create content that attracts your target buyer broadly, even if they aren’t problem-aware.
 Thought leadership content attracts relevant buyers, even if they are pre-funnel. 

Case in point: HelloSign speaks a lot to sales leaders in their content. We created a lot of content that was aimed at generally helping this persona do their job better, even if that didn’t involve using HelloSign’s products to do it.
This allows us to accomplish a number of things: 
               1. Expand search/social footprint
               2. Build brand awareness and familiarity with our target personas
               3. Drive retargeting and email marketing
Pre-funnel content can be valuable in the right context, but it can also be a distraction from the key objective. It rarely translates into immediate conversions. 
So, don’t let it become the center of your approach unless you have already built out every other part of the funnel in full.
Other examples of pre-funnel content might be live streams, webinars, and podcasts that include conversations with your ideal buyer persona.
Stampli hosts the Leaders of Modern Finance podcast, where they talk with CFOs and other finance leaders about lessons and strategies they use every day. The content itself isn’t necessarily a direct tie-in to their product. But it helps them to build an audience of relevant buyers, generate brand awareness, connect with these potential customers.
Top of the Funnel SaaS Content: Helping Prospects Solve Problems
In the world of content marketing—especially SaaS content marketing—the top of the funnel is often misunderstood.
Our take is simple: The top of the funnel is when a buyer begins to actively seek information about a problem they’re experiencing.
In our work with HelloSign, we considered a user to have entered the funnel whenever they began trying to resolve a pain point that could potentially result in a conversion.
So, for instance, if the buyer is a VP of Sales or Sales Operations Director, then they might begin their journey by looking for ways to accelerate their sales cycle—to cut down the days between contact and close. 
One solution to this problem is to implement eSignatures.
From a content perspective, we target this initial need as an opportunity to reach the buyer at the point where they are looking for information and solutions to a problem. In my post about SaaS SEO, I talked about our process of using a JTBD framework to identify and map these specific pain points to key product use cases and features. 
Within the top of the funnel content, we break down our content strategy into 3 key types of content that each serve a specific purpose. I’ve outlined this approach before, but it allows us to get very specific and tactical while staying strategic in our content planning and creation. 
1. Thought leadership (Social-viral content)
For HelloSign, we used thought leadership content to generate shares and traffic around key topics related to workplace efficiency, productivity, and other broad problems. 
Looking at our key framework, this is similar to what we might consider “social-viral” content in a B2C context.
We found that the stronger stance we are willing to take on topics related to work, culture, and operations, the more reaction we generate among our target readers. Of course, this approach can be polarizing as well.
We had to be thoughtful about where we plant a flag.
Knowing that readers who align with specific thinking are most likely to become users and customers, we can draw a line in the sand to help attract like-minded buyers who feel strongly about the nature of work and productivity. 
 Social-viral style content aimed at agitating common problems and generating product demand for HelloSign's eSignature software 

For instance, we wrote about how nobody wants to be a paper pusher in the modern office. This resonated with people who were interested in creating a great work environment and also increasing productivity across their teams.
Keep in mind that the search (SEO) opportunity for this content may not be enormous.
That’s okay. 
The role of this type of content is to reach prospects through channels other than search: social and community channels. The goal is to generate buzz and demand based on the content and drive problem awareness. 
The downside is that these topics often have a short shelf life.
They’re perennial rather than evergreen. We can circle back to them every few months or every year and use them to drive traffic through key channels.
2. Evergreen content (SEO content)
The meat and potatoes of effective SaaS content marketing–the workhorse–is evergreen content.
 Evergreen content targeted prospective buyers based on need at the top of the funnel 

This topical, keyword-focused content ranks for relevant keywords our persona is searching at the point where they begin a buying journey. The beautiful thing about evergreen content is that it’s–well–evergreen.
It may not generate a giant spike in short-term traffic or go viral and spark a massive debate, but it brings in consistent, predictable, scalable, and targeted traffic every single week (almost) like clockwork.
 Analytics show evergreen traffic growth as it compounds over time. 

Best of all, if you’re doing it right, that traffic compounds over time. And combined with the creation of new evergreen content, you’re able to accelerate and scale that traffic over time.
Building a strong library of evergreen content is the bedrock of high-growth content marketing for SaaS businesses.
But it doesn’t work alone. You also need links.
3. Linkbuilding content
Let me preface by saying that linkbuilding for HelloSign was a relatively light process. Because they already had an established brand and had generated a lot of PR, their site already had a pretty strong domain and topical authority when we began working together.
 Trends and other information leadership pieces were used to build targeted links to help drive SEO across the HelloSign website. 

But, regardless of existing domain authority, backlinks are an essential part of any SaaS content marketing plan that involves search engine optimization. 
Growing links to your site is critical to help your content (and pages) rank for the terms that are most important to your business. Many studies have shown not just the correlation between links and rankings, but that without building links to your site and your content, you are doomed from a rankings perspective. 
Using tools like Ahrefs or SEMRush, you can identify linkbuilding opportunities.
These generally involve one of two strategies:
               1. Creating original and compelling content (often data-driven) that naturally attracts backlinks over time
               2. Target outreach — “building links” in a more traditional way by creating helpful content and then finding partnership opportunities with other sites
Begin by analyzing your competitors and their pages and content that have attracted the most backlinks.
               * Why did these pages accrue links? 
               * Can you replicate their success or learn from it to create your own version of what’s worked for others in your industry?
Middle of the Funnel SaaS Content: Driving Traffic to Product Marketing Pages
Prospects who land on content and pages in the middle of the funnel are typically solution-aware. They’re actively looking for information about a certain product category or key product features.
This is what makes these pages so valuable for a SaaS business. 
Compared to top-of-the-funnel traffic, these prospects understand the problem they are looking to solve, they have higher intent, and they’re closer to making a purchase decision.
Rather than helping prospects understand their problem or pain point and then introducing a solution (generating demand), the middle of the funnel is the opposite. There is existing demand for the SaaS product and our job is to get in front of those people who are looking for a solution.
So how do we create content that captures this demand?
There are four main types of content (and pages) that we tend to focus on:
               1. Tactical how-to content
               2. Product and category lists (Best tools/products)
               3. Product marketing pages
               4. Case studies
But this is not exhaustive. Many types of content and keywords will fall into the middle of the funnel if they signal some level of purchase intent. That context will depend heavily on the SaaS business, the target buyer, the vertical or industry, and the overall buying cycle.
The key is that a buyer at this stage should be solution aware. 
This means that they’ve researched their problem enough to know what a potential solution might look like. But they haven’t necessarily identified specific products (tools, software, etc) that will provide that solution.
For instance, someone looking for something as broad as “sales tools” could be considered in the middle stages of their buying journey.
Here’s how we worked with the HelloSign team to build out a middle-of-the-funnel content strategy.
1. How-To Content
HelloSign is a SaaS product with nearly infinite specific use cases. 
They allow you to sign legally-binding documents online, meaning that they can be used in nearly every imaginable vertical and industry. 
This means that there is a huge treasure trove of tactical, product-focused, how-to content that we can create to attract solution-aware buyers with all sorts of different problems and needs. 
               * How to sign a sales contract online
               * How to sign a will online
               * How to sign employment contracts online
These queries help the user solve a specific problem and showcase actual, tactical use of the product.
One simple trick that we use with this kind of content is to simply imagine that we’re answering the query with the specific product.
“How to sign a contract online,” becomes, “How to sign a contract online with HelloSign.” 
This means that the content itself should answer the query broadly and then showcase the client’s product solving the specific problem. 
2. Product Lists
Again, because HelloSign is such a ubiquitous product that can be used in so many different ways, there is a huge opportunity to inject the product into various tool stacks and product consideration sets. 
There are obvious opportunities, like:
               * Best eSignature solutions
               * Best online contract platforms
But there are more specific, use-case-focused opportunities too:
               * Top sales tools
               * Best software for mortgage lenders
               * Essential tools for seamless contractor onboarding
All of these speak to one of the ideal buyer personas that we identified earlier. And they address their needs at this specific step in the buying journey–when they’re looking for specific products that either provide a specific solution or fit into a certain product category. 
3. Product Marketing Pages
Landing pages (not editorial content) are another key part of the strategy. Although this may not exactly fit under the “content marketing strategy” umbrella, it’s important to mention because they play a critical role in capturing buyers with high intent and converting them directly into sign ups.
Middle of the funnel are product pages include:
               * Features
               * Integrations
               * Solutions
In HelloSign’s case, this content exists on the marketing site.
 HelloSign's marketing site houses a number of specific and targeted product marketing pages. 

They have a healthy catalog of specific product pages, including all of the features, use cases, and persona-driven content that was well-suited to rank for middle of the funnel keywords and capture solution-aware traffic.
But getting these pages to rank can sometimes be a challenge, which in turn makes it hard to capture that qualified traffic.
One of our content marketing goals for HelloSign was to help grow the site’s authority to drive SEO for the product-marketing content. 
We did this by:
               * Creating “supporting” content that includes internal links to these product-marketing pages
               * Driving social traffic and social signals
               * Generating and building links across the site to increase authority
With this approach, we were able to create more value from the existing pages on the entire HelloSign website. Each link and social signal we generated helped give a small boost to every middle-of-the-funnel page on the product marketing site. 
This is clutch.
But, again, not every buyer will enter the funnel through search. 
So, we also created some middle-of-the-funnel content that could be used through other channels like social, email, and retargeting to drive prospects from the top of the funnel further into the buying process. 
4. Case Studies and Product Content
We used content to drive awareness and traffic for middle-of-the-funnel prospects by creating case studies, product content, and tactical implementation guides. Case studies, in particular, play a huge role in demonstrating both the versatility and range of HelloSign’s use cases as well as the massive positive outcomes that their customers have experienced by using the products.
 HelloSign's case studies were critical for driving conversions throughout the funnel. 

Fortunately, we had a great partner at HelloSign who collaborated with the product team to create impressive case studies.
We also used keyword-optimized content on the blog to focus on specific implementations of the product for key segments and buyer personas.
 Tactical implementation posts provided actionable content for buyers as they evaluate the purchase decision. 

Once we reached this stage in our content marketing strategy, we’d built a solid collection of content to help SaaS buyers move from initial pain points to identifying solutions and product-focused MOFU content to insert HelloSign products into the reader’s consideration set.
But, there’s one more step left–that’s the actual buying decision.
The bottom of the funnel is where the buyer scrutinizes products most closely and determines which one is right for them.
Bottom of the Funnel SaaS Content: Converting Prospects Into Customers
Welcome to the bottom of the funnel.
At this stage, the buyer is well on their way to using or purchasing a HelloSign product. 
They have identified and articulated a specific “job” that they need to be done (pain point), discovered product solutions, features, and integrations that will work for their use case, and are now aware of specific products that meet those requirements.
But now they have to decide which specific product or service they’ll actually buy.
Depending on the size of the market, they could be deciding between two options or 20. The key to winning at the bottom of the funnel is creating relevant content and pages that honestly position your product as the ideal solution for your best-fit customers. 
This content usually fits into three buckets:
               1. Comparisons
               2. Alternatives
               3. Buying Guides
1. Comparison content
The first type of BOFU content for SaaS companies is a comparison – Us vs Them.
For HelloSign:
               * HelloSign vs DocuSign
               * HelloSign vs Adobe Sign
               * HelloSign vs PandaDoc
HelloSign’s product marketing team handled most of this content, comparing their software to competitors or alternative solutions.
 HelloSign has no qualms with contrasting their product directly with competitors or alternative solutions.  

This type of content plays a critical role in completing the journey for buyers who are interested in HelloSign products but may be considering other options as well. 
Keep in mind that some of the audience at this stage has followed along the entire content journey. Maybe they first discovered the company by reading a blog post that was at the top of the funnel (or even pre-funnel!)
But others have not. 
Maybe they were this close to making a buying decision but decided to evaluate a few other solutions. Or perhaps their procurement process requires that they perform due diligence on three possible vendors before choosing the best one.
Whatever the case may be, this is a chance for you to reach the buyer when they are closest to making a final purchase decision. 
And, hopefully, convert them into customers. 
2. Alternatives
Another key strategy here is to position the product as a viable alternative to another product that your buyers may be familiar with. 
For instance, HelloSign could be a viable alternative to both DocuSign or a more robust platform like Ironclad. 
The key to creating this content is:
               1. Identify which alternative solutions your various buyers may be considering (or currently using if they are looking to switch)
               2. Determine the reasons why buyers may be unhappy with these products–what is driving them to look for an alternative?
               3. Outline how your product compares and can work as a viable alternative for buyers who aren’t bought in to the other solutions
               4. Provide guidance on other potential alternatives, too
3. Buying Guides
Finally, we can reach these bottom-of-the-funnel buyers by creating detailed buying guides to help them evaluate these various product solutions and decide which one is best for them.
               * What features should they look for?
               * What questions should they ask?
               * How do they know if it will work for their specific use case?
Buying guides are a powerful tool for attracting these buyers when they’re making a final decision and can also help you position your product as the best solution for your most ideal customers.
Building a SaaS Content Marketing Roadmap
One of my favorite things to tell people is that content marketing is like chess–not checkers.
To win at SaaS content marketing, you need more than just a single move in your arsenal. You need more than good content. You need more than luck.
You need strategy.
And part of that strategy is driven by how the specific content that you create will work together–with other content, with other marketing strategies, and with your overall market or industry–to achieve the desired outcome.
This is what we call a framework.
It’s the skeleton of a strategy that you can fill in with the specifics of your company, your goals, and your market. Then you have something you can execute in order to achieve your goals.
The cool thing about content frameworks–and why I love writing and talking about them–is that they give us a shared understanding of what we are trying to achieve, what moving pieces are involved in the strategy, and how we will execute them in a way that becomes more than the sum of the parts.
It’s like a visual guide to chess openings and scenarios. 
But there’s another level to consider. 
Once you have a clear picture of how you plan to approach content marketing for your SaaS business, you need to figure out what content to make–and when. 
How do you prioritize content and build a realistic roadmap?
There’s no one single answer. But we marry a few different methodologies when prioritizing and planning execution:
               1. Business value– The most important factor is how relevant the topics and content are to the core of your business. It’s always best to start by creating content that speaks most directly to your best-fit customers, most unique features, and most obvious benefits.
               2. Topical authority – We recommend planning content around core topics and building these out as a “cluster” rather than publishing content across a huge array of different topics. This helps from a content creation perspective and also helps you build topical authority to improve SEO.
               3. Reach – Lastly, we consider the potential reach or search volume of the content we’re creating. Obviously, the greater reach, the more potential impact it may have. But this comes last because reach doesn’t mean much if there’s no business value.
Content Creation
So far, we’ve talked a lot about content planning and strategy. 
But, at some point, you have to start creating and publishing. So what does that look like?
Obviously, this isn’t a detailed guide on writing quality content. But I can share a bit about what the process might look like and how you can start to think about content operations and your content team. 
Content schedule
Let’s start by taking all of the pieces that we identified as part of our strategy and turning it into an actual plan. 
Most people would call this a content calendar. But it doesn’t necessarily need to be a running list of content you’ll publish on certain days. Many teams now operate using agile workflows–sprints, iterations, etc–to batch and release new content. 
Especially if your main distribution channel is SEO, the timing of your publishing is less important than simply getting it on the site so it can be crawled and indexed. 
There’s no right way to plan or schedule each piece of content. 
But, in our experience, it usually makes sense to work through content around central themes (topic clusters) before moving into a new theme and topic. For instance, we might create and plan several articles for the Optimist site about different facets of SaaS content marketing before moving to another topic like content writing or SEO. 
Content team
Many teams struggle to reach a manageable and scalable output for their content team because they often try to find one person who can do it all. While there are a few true “unicorns” out there who can be a one-person content marketing team, it’s a pretty tall ask. 
Most successful content marketing teams generally have at least 2-3 people involved. And as the team scales, it’s not unreasonable to have 10-20 people – including in-house or freelance writers. 
It becomes obvious when you consider all of the work that goes into executing a SaaS content marketing strategy from beginning to end.
Content marketing really includes:
               * Content strategy and planning
               * SEO (keyword research, etc)
               * Content writing and editing
               * Content design
               * Production (setup, formatting, etc)
               * Promotion and linkbuilding
               * Measurement and analysis
               * Content maintenance, updating, and optimization
In some cases, it makes the most sense to bring in a small team (or a great manager with a team of freelancers). In other cases, this is one of the main reasons why many SaaS companies decide to hire a content marketing agency that can provide a full-service team.
Choosing the Right SaaS Content Marketing Agency
When it comes to driving growth through content marketing, having the right team on your side can make all the difference. 
If you want to see results, you don’t need just keyword research, strategy, content, design, or promotion—you need a full-service content marketing partner that can handle it all.
Optimist has been driving results with full-service content marketing for the past five years and we plan to continue elevating our clients’ businesses to new heights. 
Our team is composed of amazingly talented designers, strategists, writers, and promotion experts. Each of us is dedicated to our craft and we come together to create custom growth-focused content. 
We’re not generalists.
We’re not jacks-of-all-trades.
We’re experts at what we do—and what we do is SaaS content marketing.
From the top to the bottom of the funnel, we worked with HelloSign to build a SaaS content marketing strategy that helped them drive growth and take their business to the next level.
While our team obviously can’t take credit for HelloSign’s overall success and ultimate acquisition by Dropbox, we’re extremely proud of the role we played. 
By working together with their team, we were able to put together a SaaS content marketing strategy that served an important role in driving the traffic and leads that they needed to fuel their growth.